---
title: 'Directorium Anglicanum: pages 146 to 158'
description: 'Directorium Anglicanum: pages 146 to 158. From Project Canterbury.'
---

The Ordinal

<table border="2" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="2"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>[page 146]</p><p>"Homo imponit manum, Deus largitur gratiam: sacerdos imponit supplicem dexteram, Deus benedicit potenti dextera."—<i>S. Ambrose.</i></p><p align="center">180.</p><p align="center">THE FORM AND MANNER OF*</p><p align="center">MAKING, ORDAINING, AND CONSECRATING OF</p><p align="center">BISHOPS, PRIESTS, AND DEACONS,†</p><p align="center">ACCORDING TO THE ORDER OF THE UNITED CHURCH OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.</p><p align="center">THE PREFACE.</p><p>"<i>It is evident unto all men diligently reading the Holy Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles' time there have been these Orders of Ministers in </i>CHRIST's <i>Church; Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Which Offices were evermore had in such reverend estimation, that no man might presume to execute any of them, except he were first called, tried, examined, and known to have such qualities as are requisite for the same;</i> <i>and also by public Prayer, with Imposition of Hands, were approved and admitted thereunto by lawful authority. And therefore, to the intent that these Orders may be continued, and reverently used and esteemed, in the United Church of </i>England <i>and </i>Ireland; <i>no man shall be accounted or taken to be a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon in the United Church of </i>England <i>and </i>Ireland, <i>or suffered to execute any of the said Functions, except he be called, tried, examined, and admitted thereunto, according to the Form hereafter following, or hath had formerly Episcopal Consecration, or Ordination.</i>‡</p><p><sup>"</sup><i>And none shall be admitted a Deacon, except he be twenty-three years of age, unless he have a faculty. And every man which is to be admitted a Priest shall be full four-and-twenty years</i></p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><i>* </i>"Et bene semper caveatur ab omni intitulacione, et nimia deformitate membrorum in sacris, ne sint gibbosi, vel neri, vel alias corpore vitiati, propter scandalum ecclesias et cleri evitandum: praemuniantur omnes ordinandi quod non recedunt ante finem missae." Pont. Exon.</p><p>"Et bene caveatur de omni mutilatione membrorum ordinandorum in sacris. Ne sint etiam gibbosi, vel mansi, vel alias corpore vitiati, propter scandalum cleri et ecclessiae evitandum." Pont. Saris.</p><p>† Bishops are consecrated before the Offertory, Priests after the Gospel, and Deacons before it: according to the rule of the Universal Church.</p><p>‡ On this principle a Priest coming from the Greek or the Roman Church is received without re-ordination. A Lutheran or Calvinist Minister cannot exercise any Sacerdotal Functions till he has been ordained, and is treated in every respect as a mere layman, for such he is.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p147"></a>[page 147]</p><p><i>old. And every man which is to be ordained or consecrated Bishop shall be fully thirty years of age.</i></p><p>"<i>And the Bishop, knowing either by himself, or by sufficient testimony, any person to be a man of virtuous conversation, and without crime;</i> <i>and, after examination and trial, finding him learned in the Latin tongue, and sufficiently instructed in Holy Scripture, may at the times appointed in the Canon, or else, on urgent occasion, upon some other Sunday or Holy-day, in the face of the Church, admit him a Deacon, in such manner and form as hereafter followeth</i>"</p><p align="center">THE FORM AND MANNER OF</p><p align="center">MAKING OF DEACONS.*</p><p>"<i>When the day appointed by the Bishop is come, after Morning Prayer is ended, there shall be a Sermon or Exhortation, declaring the duty and office of such as come to be admitted Deacons; how necessary that Order is in the Church of </i>CHRIST, <i>and also, how the people ought to esteem them in their Office.</i>"</p><p>Episcopal Vestments: purple cassock,† amice, rochet, alb, stole, tunicle, dalmatic, maniple, chasuble, mitre, gloves, episcopal ring, sandals,‡ buskins,‡ and pastoral staff.</p><p>N.B.—The gremial should be laid on the credence. For its use see Par. 84.</p><p>The Bishop will enter the Cathedral Church veiled in purple cassock, rochet, chimere,§ episcopal ring, zucchetto, and birretta. If he do not vest in the sacristy he will receive his vestments from the altar. (See Par. 83.) The faldstool must be placed at the epistle corner for this purpose. The Bishop bearing his pastoral staff, unless it be carried by his chaplain, will proceed from the sacristy to the altar preceded by the choir, acolytes, deacons, priests,</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* The Synod of Exeter, a.d. 1287, expressly forbids Deacons to hear confessions; "firmiter inhibemus, ne diaconi confessiones audiant, paenitentiasve injungant, vel sacra ministrant, aut aliqua officia exerceant, quae solis sacerdotibus sunt concessa." Wilkins' <i>Conc. Tom. 2, </i>p. 145.</p><p>† The Bishop's cassock has a train which is looped up, till he vests for the function.</p><p>‡ These are put on in the sacristy by the Bishop's domestic servant—not dressed in the episcopal livery.</p><p>§ The Bishop's chimere (see Par. 85, note #, and subnote 2,) answers to the <i>Mantelletum</i><a href="#_edn1" name="_ednref1" title="">[1]</a> of the west. The Priest's hood corresponds to the Mozzetta<a href="#_edn2" name="_ednref2" title="">[2]</a> in form. The Roman Pontifical prescribes that the Bishop shall come to the church vested in a cope.<a href="#_edn3" name="_ednref3" title="">[3]</a></p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p148"></a>[page 148]</p><p>and Ministers of the altar, in their proper vestments, (the holy Ministers <i>without their maniples,</i>) in the accustomed processional order. (See Parr. 16, 117, 122.) The persons to be ordained will remain with the Archdeacon in the sacristy. On reaching the faldstool the Bishop will remove his birretta and deliver it to the Deacon,* who will hand it to the subdeacon, who in his turn will deliver it to an acolyte. He will wear the zucchetto till the assumption of the mitre. It is desirable on so solemn an occasion to appoint some discreet and learned Priest to act as a master of the ceremonies, that "all things may be done decently and in order." He will distribute the episcopal vestments amongst the clerks, commencing with the amice, according to the usual order. The gloves will be carried on a salver. The vestments will be received by the Deacon from the acolyte in the accustomed order, (see<i> supra, </i>Episcopal Vestments,) and with the assistance of the subdeacon he will vest the Bishop therewith. N.B.—The Bishop on being vested with the dalmatic sits down, and the Deacon removes the episcopal ring, and hands it to the subdeacon to place on a salver held by an acolyte for that function. The gloves are then presented on a salver, and should be so arranged that the right may lie at the side of the Deacon and the left on that of the Subdeacon. In putting on the gloves the Deacon assists at the right, the Subdeacon at the left. The Bishop having put on his gloves rises and is vested in the chasuble, and again sits down. Whilst he is assuming the chasuble the assistant Priest, who should be the highest dignitary of the choir, puts on a cope and reverently places the ring on the annular finger of the Bishop. (See p. 18, sec. 15.) The Deacon then puts upon him the orphreyed mitre which the Subdeacon has brought from the gospel corner. (See Par. 83, note *, and subnote<sup>1</sup>.) The Deacon throughout the function is principally intrusted to assist with the mitre. The mitre being placed on the Bishop, the Deacon and Subdeacon pass to his left, having previously made an inclination to him. They then, with the assistance of the acolytes, <i>put on their maniples. </i>The Bishop then leaves his faldstool, which the acolytes place in front of the midst of the altar, and seats himself on his throne on the north side (see Par. 172, note *) fronting the south, he delivers his pastoral staff to his chaplain, who either holds it or places it in its stand beside the throne (on the left). The Deacon and Subdeacon will stand on the right and left of, and nearest to, the throne. The assistant Priest and Clergy will take their position west of the throne facing the south, the acolytes theirs on the south side. The Canons† will sit on benches north and south of the Sacrarium. The altar-rails, if there be any, should be removed, as they would interfere with the ceremony. The other clerics will</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* It is the Deacon's function to vest the Bishop—the Subdeacon's to assist the Deacon in so doing.</p><p>† Canons should wear the amyss instead of the hood. See p. 21, sec. 21, and subnote 2.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p149"></a>[page 149]</p><p>sit in the stalls <i>in choro. </i>The Archdeacon vested in surplice and cope,* will then issue from the sacristy followed by the persons about to be ordained, (the Deacons, if there be any to be ordained Priests, to take precedence of the laics to be admitted into the order of Deacons,) and will conduct them to their place in the choir. Matins will then commence, and a sermon will follow. A moveable pulpit or a lectern will be placed in the midst of the choir for the preacher fronting the altar, who will be vested in cassock, <i>cotta, </i>and stole of the colour of the day. The sermon ended, the Bishop with his pastoral staff in his hand, will take his seat on the faldstool (the chair) in front of the altar; the Deacon and Subdeacon standing on his right and left, the other clerics and the acolytes on the south side facing the north. The Archdeacon will then signify (by an acolyte) that the persons to be ordained are to take their places in front of the sacrarium, who will advance two by two <i>in plano, </i>and taught by the Archdeacon will, in succession, genuflect to the Bishop and gradually arrange themselves in a semicircle before the episcopal chair.† After the presentation by the Archdeacon, who will then kneel at a faldstool fronting the north prepared for him on the south side at the extremity of the <i>corona </i>of persons to be ordained, the Bishop having delivered his pastoral staff to his chaplain, who will stand on the left of the Subdeacon, will sing the Litany before the faldstool with his face to the east, the Deacon passing to his right, the Subdeacon to his left,—both kneeling. If the Bishop delegates the singing of the Litany to an inferior cleric, as it appears he may from the remarkable introduction of the word "Priest" in the latter portion of the Litany,—"Then shall the <i>Priest,</i>" &c., the Litany desk must either be (previously) moved within the sacrarium, or else the <i>corona </i>of persons to be ordained must open out into two lines, north and south, facing each other. In either case the Bishop will still kneel before his faldstool (or chair), as directed above. The old English custom is for the Bishop to rise at the petition,‡—"That it may please Thee to bless these Thy servants, now to be admitted into the order of Deacons (<i>or Priests</i>)<i>,</i>" or "our brother elected," if a Bishop or Archbishop, &c., and taking his pastoral staff, which his chaplain will deliver to him, in his (left) hand to turn him to those about to be ordained, and make the sign of the Cross over them. This done, the Bishop delivers his staff to his chaplain and again kneels at the faldstool as before.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* "Archidiaconus capa indutus humiliter respiciens in episcopum cum his verbis alloquatur." Rubric Sarisbur. Pont.</p><p>† "Et si sint multi, stent in circuitu." Rub. Saris. Pont. "Ad Pontificem accedunt, et coram eo in modum coronas se disponunt." Rub. de Ord. Presb. Pont. Rom.</p><p>‡ "Hic surgat episcopus et sumat baculum in manu sua, et conversus ad ordinandos dicat: Ut electos istos bene+dicere digneris. Te rogamus," &c. Saris. Pont. Cf. Pont. Exon. apud Barnes, p. 84. "Tune surgat consecrator et ad consecrandum se vertens, baculum pastoralem in manu sinistra tenens, dicat primo: Ut hunc praesentem electum benedicere + digneris. Chorus: Te rogamus audi nos." Pont. Exon. Cons. Epis.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p150"></a>[page 150]</p><p>N.B.—The Bishop wears the mitre throughout the function, except at (the first verse of the <i>Veni Creator </i>at the ordination of Priests and consecration of an Archbishop or Bishop,) the Collects, Gospel, and intonations of the Creed. But see Par. 83, note *, for further directions as to the Mitre.</p><p>The maniple is not placed on the altar with the other vestments, but in the Service Book, in the place of the Gospel for the day. It is put on <i>last* </i>of all the vestments. An acolyte will remove the maniple from the Service Book and present it to the Subdeacon. The Deacon will retire a little behind to give place to the Subdeacon. The <i>Subdeacon </i>then vests the Bishop with it.</p><p>The gloves and ring are taken off at the Offertory by the Deacon and Sub-Deacon; the Deacon taking off the ring and right glove, the Subdeacon the left. After the Washing the Deacon puts the ring on the Bishop's annular finger. The gloves are not put on again, but are placed upon a salver on the credence. Consequently they are worn at the laying on of hands.†</p><p>The Bishop will place both hands upon the heads of the persons to be ordained, he sits in his chair‡ each person kneeling before him in succession. All those to be ordained kneel immediately after the Interrogations.</p><p>In the Ordering of Priests and Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops the assistant Priests and Bishops stand on each side the chair. They must be careful to use both hands in "the laying on of hands."</p><p>The celebration will be, of course, solemn or high service, especially as it is "Pontifical."§ The lights will be lighted by an acolyte immediately before the Communion office, and the incense ignited in a thurible on the credence.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* According to the Roman Rite the Bishop's maniple is not put on till the "Confiteor." But as in the English Rite the Confession has been removed from the <i>Praeparatio ad missam, </i>which before the revision of our Services in the reign of Edw. VI. preceded the <i>Introit, </i>to the Ordinarium missae,<a href="#_edn4" name="_ednref4" title="">[4]</a> it seems most convenient, and accordant with Liturgical propriety for the Bishop to vest with maniple as directed in the text.</p><p>† In the old English Ordinal there were two layings on of hands; at the first, the Bishop <i>stood </i>and laid his <i>right </i>hand on the heads severally of each person to be ordained, the Priests doing likewise. At the second laying on of hands he places his <i>bands </i>(both hands) it would seem from the rubrics, <i>standing, </i>on the heads of those to be ordained. The Roman Pontifical directs the Bishop to stand during the first, and to sit during the second Imposition. Between the two layings on of hands the Unction formerly took place, for which purpose the gloves were removed, the ring being retained. The gloves were resumed, according to the rubric in the Exeter Pontifical, immediately before the second imposition. It is therefore proper to retain the gloves throughout the function, with the exceptions given in the text. See Maskell's Mon. Rit. Vol. iii. pp. 204, 212, 219, and Exon. Pont, apud Barnes, pp. 37, 91.</p><p>‡ See note †. As our rubric combines the two impositions, it is proper for the Bishop to sit, considering the position that the laying on of hands occupies in the function. At the second imposition the Sarum Pontifical directed the <i>hands </i>of the Bishop to be imposed. The Exeter directed the gloved right hand, the mitre to be worn, and the stole to be held in the left hand. See Maskell and Barnes as above.</p><p>§ When a Bishop celebrates at <i>Low </i>Service, he should always vest at the altar, He does not wear the tunic, dalmatic, or mitre, nor use his pastoral staff. The maniple is not put in the book, but laid on the gospel side. He is served by two servers, vested in cassock and <i>cotta, </i>one of whom ought properly to be in Deacon's orders at the least.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p151"></a>[page 151]</p><p align="center">181. <i>Vestments for those to be Ordained Deacons.</i></p><p><b><sup>"</sup></b><i>First, the Archdeacon, or his Deputy, shall present unto the Bishop </i>(<i>sitting in his * chair near the holy table</i>)<i> such as desire to be ordained Deacons, </i>(<i>each of them being decently habited,</i>)<i> saying these words.</i>"</p><p>A girded albe,† or a surplice, over a cassock.</p><p align="center">182. <i>The Bishop's Chair.</i></p><p>Should be in front of the altar.‡</p><p align="center">183. <i>The Litany.</i></p><p>The Litany as said by the Bishop in the Ordinal is said in the full Eucharistic Vestments, because in the Ordering of Priests and Deacons, he is vested as "Pontifex" and celebrant, throughout the Function, and not that the Litany is part of the Communion Office, but a prelude to it. If the Bishop delegates the singing of it to assistant Priests, they will be vested in amices, girded albes, and white copes, or at least in surplice and white cope. See Par. 156. But in the Consecration of an Archbishop or Bishop the Litany is <i>interpolated </i>into the Liturgy, and consequently must be said by the Consecrator in his full Archiepiscopal and Eucharistic vestments. If he delegates it to be sung by the Assistant Bishops, (the Gospeller, and Epistoler,) they are already vested in the vestments proper to the function. See Par. 189. If, however, the Assistant Priests have been directed by the Archbishop to say it, they will be vested in girded albe, amice, and white cope.</p><p align="center">184. <i>The colours of vestments for the Communion Office.</i></p><p>The Vestments of the altar and the ministers thereof will be of the colour of the day.§ Clerics not ministering at the altar will wear cassocks, surplices and hoods.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* "<i>Episcopus sedens cum mitra</i>" Pont. Saris. et Exeter.</p><p>† "Every one of them that are present having upon him a plain alb."—Ordination Offices, published by Grafton, 1549. Abp. Sancroft's Collections.</p><p>‡ "Tunc sedeat episcopus ante medium altaris et introducantur omnes ordinandi et stent similiter ante episcopum." Rubric from Bp. Lacy's Pontifical.</p><p>§ In the Latin church, in the "Missa pro eligendo Summo Pontifice," the colour is <i>red. </i>"In Consecratione Summi Pontificis,... et electionis et consecrationis episcopi," <i>white. </i>See <i>Rub. Gen. Miss. Rom.</i></p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p152"></a>[page 152]</p><p align="center">"<i>Then one of them, appointed by the Bishop, shall read the Gospel.</i>"<i>*</i></p><p>The Deacon appointed to read the Gospel will be vested in amice, girded albe, and maniple. He will carry his stole in his left hand, and his dalmatic over his left arm. An acolyte will assist him, before reading the Gospel, to veil in the stole and dalmatic; as he must, of course, perform the function of a Deacon in the full diaconal vestments required by the rubric.</p><p>An acolyte, while the Deacon is vesting, will replenish the thurible (with a spoon) from the incense-boat and ignite it.</p><p>"<i>And here it must be declared unto the Deacon, that he must continue in that Office of a Deacon the space of a whole year </i>(<i>except for reasonable causes it shall otherwise seem good unto the Bishop</i>)<i> to the intent he may be perfect, and well expert in the things appertaining to the Ecclesiastical Administration. In executing whereof if he be found faithful and diligent, he may be admitted by his Diocesan to the Order of Priesthood, at the times appointed in the Canon, or else, on urgent occasion, upon some other Sunday, or Holy-day, in the face of the Church, in such manner and form as hereafter followeth.</i>"</p><p align="center">THE FORM AND MANNER OF</p><p align="center">ORDERING OF PRIESTS.</p><p>"<i>When the day appointed by the Bishop is come, after Morning Prayer is ended, there shall be a Sermon or Exhortation, declaring the Duty and Office of such as come to be admitted Priests; how necessary that Order is in the Church of </i>CHRIST, <i>and also how the people ought to esteem them in their Office</i>"</p><p align="center">185. <i>Habits of those who are to receive the Order of Priesthood.</i></p><p>"<i>First, the Archdeacon, or, in his absence, one appointed in his stead, shall present unto the Bishop </i>(<i>sitting in his chair near to the holy table</i>)<i> all them that shall receive the Order of Priesthood that day </i>(<i>each of them being decently habited</i>)<i> and say,</i>"</p><p>Cassock, amice, girded albe, maniple, and stole (worn over left shoulder and tied on right side at the girdle,) and maniple. The folded chasuble (<i>planeta</i>) may be carried on the left arm.</p><p>N.B.—When there are persons to be ordained Deacons, as well as Priests, the former stand on the epistle side laterally, the latter in a semicircle. The rubric directs the Ordination of Deacons to precede that of Priests. But the Priests are to be communicated before the Deacons.</p><p>N.B.—The choristers and acolytes are always communicated before other lay people.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* "Putting on a tunicle, shall, &c."  Ordinal of 1549.</p><p>† "Every one of them having upon a plain alb." Ordinal of 1549.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p153"></a>[page 153]</p><p>The proper Introit to the Communion is according to the Ordinal of 1549, "<i>Expectans expectavi Dominum.</i>" Ps. xli.; or else this Psalm, "<i>Memento, Domine, David</i>" Ps. cxxxii.; or else this Psalm, "<i>Laudate Nomen Domini.</i>" Ps. cxxxv.</p><p align="center">186. <i>Veni Creator Spiritus.</i></p><p>The Bishop sings the first verse kneeling, without his mitre, turned to the altar. He then resumes the mitre and sits in his chair.* The next prayer following is said without the mitre standing before the chair and facing the Deacons to be ordained. A Priest will kneel before the Bishop and hold the Service Book.</p><p>N.B.—A Priest should always serve the Bishop with the book. When the Bishop sits in his chair the Priest with the Service Book stands on his right hand.</p><p>N.B.—The Priests who join in laying on of hands <i>stand </i>on either side of the Bishop <i>who sits </i>in his chair, the Deacons in turn kneeling before him—all the Deacons to be ordained Priests kneeling in a semicircle.</p><p align="center">187. <i>Pause during silent Supplication.</i></p><p>"<i>After this, the congregation shall be desired, secretly in their prayers, to make their humble supplications to </i>GOD<i> for all these things;</i> <i>for the which prayers there shall be silence kept for a space.</i>"</p><p><sup>"</sup>Brethren, let us all join in one prayer, that he, who is chosen for the help and furtherance of your salvation may, by GOD's merciful gift, obtain the blessing of the priesthood, so that he may never be found unfit for his station; but that by the privilege of his office he may receive the gift and virtues of the HOLY GHOST, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen."—<i>Old Gallican Form of Prayer for those about to be Ordained Priests.</i></p><p align="center">188.</p><p align="center">"<i>Then the Bishop shall deliver to every one of them kneeling, the Bible into his hand, saying.</i>"†</p><p><b><sup>"</sup></b><i>And if on the same day the Order of Deacons be given to some, and the Order of Priesthood to others; the Deacons shall be first presented, and then the Priests;</i> <i>and it shall suffice that the Litany be once said for both. The Collects shall both be used; first, that for Deacons, then that for Priests, The Epistle shall be </i>Ephes. iv. 7—13, <i>as before in this Office. Immediately after which, they that are to be made Deacons shall take the Oath of Supremacy, be examined, and Ordained, as is above prescribed. Then one of them having read the Gospel </i>(<i>which shall be either out of </i>S. Matt. ix. 36—38, <i>as before in this Office; or else </i>S. Luke xii. 35—38, <i>as before in the Form for the Ordering of Deacons,</i>)<i> they that are to be made priests shall likewise take the Oath of Supremacy, be examined, and ordained, as is in this Office before appointed</i>"</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* Cf. Rub. Pont. Rom. de Ord. Presb.</p><p>† "The Bible in the one hand, and the chalice or cup with the bread in the other hand, and say." Ordination Offices, 1549.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p154"></a>[page 154]</p><p align="center"><i>Caution.</i></p><p>A Deacon will of course, during his diaconate, have profoundly studied every the minutest detail of the Communion Office, and will have been careful to perfect himself in the duties of his special function, for his habitual attendance on the Priest in offering the Holy Sacrifice, is the best of all preparation for the day when he shall be privileged to offer It himself.* His first celebration will, as is most likely and also most proper, be a <i>Low </i>Service, and it will be seemly for some learned and discreet Priest, who will most probably be the Rector of the parish, to fulfil the function of server.</p><p align="center">THE FORM OF ORDAINING OR CONSECRATING OF AN</p><p align="center">ARCHBISHOP OR BISHOP;</p><p align="center">WHICH IS ALWAYS TO BE PERFORMED UPON SOME SUNDAY OR HOLY-DAY.</p><p>"<i>When all things are duly prepared in the church, and set in order, after Morning Prayer is ended, the Archbishop </i>(<i>or some other Bishop appointed</i>) <i>shall begin the Communion Service.</i>"†</p><p align="center">189. <i>The Vestments.</i></p><p>Episcopal vestments. In addition to the episcopal vestments (see Par. 180,) the Archbishop will wear over his chasuble the pall,‡ and the crozier (see p. 18, sec. 16,) will be borne by one of his chaplains, chosen to act as cross-bearer or "croyser."</p><p>The vestments of the altar, of the consecrator, and of the holy Ministers will be white. For the other arrangements and position of the Archbishop's chair, see Par. 180.</p><p>The altar lights will be lighted before the Archbishop arrives at the altar.</p><p>For the manner of vesting, see Par. 180.</p><p>The two assistant Bishops will wear rochets, white copes,§ and plain mitres,</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* "His expletis, et eis ad ordinem suum reversis Pontifex sedens cum mitra, et baculo, admonet eos, dicens: quia res, quam tractaturi estis, satis periculosa est, filii dilectissimi, moneo vos, ut diligenter totius Missae ordinem, atque Hostiae consecrationem, ac fractionem, et communionem, ab aliis jam doctis Sacerdotibus discatis, priusquam ad celebrandum Missam accedatis." Pont. Rom. De Ord. Presb.</p><p>† "Then shall the Psalm for the Introit and other things at the Holy Communion be," &c. Ordination Offices, 1549.</p><p>"The Psalm for the Introit at the Communion as at the Ordering of Priests." Ordination Offices, 1549.</p><p>‡ The English Archbishops assume the pall, as belonging to their fees. It is never worn over any vestment but the chasuble.</p><p>§ "Duo episcopi, capis induti, deducant electum." Pont. Sarisb. Two Bishops (being also <i>in surplices and copes, and having their pastoral staves in their hands.</i>) Ordination Offices, 1549.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p155"></a>[page 155]</p><p>and though they act as epistoler and gospeller, they will not wear the maniple or the stole. The maniple is <i>never </i>worn with the cope, nor is the stole except at some Pontifical function proper, as at a Confirmation, or by the Priest in the Proanaphoral Service used on Good Friday, at the Litany when preceding a Solemn Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, at the lesser Sacrament of Matrimony and at Funerals.</p><p>The mitre given to the elected Bishop is <i>mitra simplex.</i></p><p align="center">190. <i>Habit of the Elected Bishop.</i></p><p>"<i>After the Gospel, and the </i>Nicene <i>Creed, and the Sermon are ended, the elected Bishop </i>(<i>vested with his rochette*</i>)<i> shall be presented by two</i>†<i> Bishops unto the Archbishop of that province </i>(<i>or to some other Bishop appointed by lawful commission</i>)<i> the Archbishop sitting in his chair near the holy table, and the Bishops that present him saying</i>"</p><p>A rochet, which is worn under a girded albe with its appendages, viz., amice, maniple, stole crossed, and over all a cope. The colour white.</p><p>During the Litany‡ the Archbishop will kneel at his faldstool with his face to the altar; the two assistant Bishops on each side. The elected Bishop will kneel at a faldstool placed for him below the platform of the altar. For further directions, episcopal and otherwise, in singing the Litany, see Par. 180.</p><p>The <i>Veni Creator </i>ended, the Archbishop will stand, served by the senior Bishop with the book. See Par. 186. The junior Bishop will remove the elected Bishop's mitre.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* "Consecratio episcoporum Temper agenda est die dominica, et examinatio et professio eorum ante missarum solemnia. <i>Electus vero sacerdotalibus indumentis induatur praeter casulam, pro qua induatur capa solempni </i>et sic comprovinciales episcopi deducunt eum per manus eorum, consecratore sedente super faldistorium, <i>in medio magni altaris, dorso verso ad altare, s</i>edilia episcoporum in modum coronas a dextris et a sinistris electi. Tunc consecrator dicat." Rubric from Bishop Lacy's Pontifical (Consecratio Episcoporum.) "The elected Bishop having upon him <i>a surplice and a cope</i> shall," &c. Ordination Offices, 1549.</p><p>† "Ut sine tribus episcopis nullus episcopus ordinetur." Council of Aries.</p><p>"Electus ducatur ad locum suum; acoliti induant illum sandalia, tunicam, dalmaticam et casulam, postquam consecrator dixerit," &c. Bp. Lacy's Pontifical, Consecratio Episcoporum. The Mitre is given somewhat later, but immediately before the delivery of the "codex evangeliorum."</p><p>‡ "Cum Litania; et prosternat se ordinator simul cum electo et caeteris episcopis ante altare super faldistoria; episcopus electus desuper stramenta ad basim altaris; et dicatur litania sicut in ordinibus, et cum ventum suerit ad versum qui pro domino episcopo cantatur, surgat consecrator, et dicat conversus ad electum sic:</p><p>"Ut hunc electum bene+dicere digneris,</p><p>Resp, Te rogamus," &c.</p><p>—Pont. Saris. Cons. Elec. in epis.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p156"></a>[page 156]</p><p align="center">191. <i>Assumption of the rest of the Episcopal habit.</i></p><p>"<i>Then shall the Bishop elect put on the rest of the Episcopal habit</i>; <i>and kneeling down, </i>Veni, Creator Spiritus, <i>shall be sung or said over him, the Archbishop beginning</i>, <i>and the Bishops, with others that are present, answering by verses, as followeth.</i>"</p><p>The two assistant Bishops will then vest the elect Bishop with the tunic, the dalmatic, the gloves, the chasuble (white), and episcopal ring, and put the plain white mitre upon his head. The elect Bishop kneeling in front of the Archbishop. See Par. 186.</p><p align="center">192. <i>The Consecration proper or laying on of hands.</i></p><p>The elected Bishop will kneel, without his mitre, before the Archbishop, who has resumed his mitre, sitting in his chair before the midst of the altar.* The assistant Bishops will s<i>tand </i>on either side the chair, the senior on the right, the junior on the left hand of the Archbishop. The Consecrator and assistant Bishops will touch the head of the elected Bishop with both hands.</p><p>An assistant Priest vested in cassock and <i>cotta </i>will kneel at the right of the Archbishop with the Book, which should be folio size, as more convenient for the Consecrator to read from. The assistant Bishops will stand on each side the chair as before. If the Archbishop, following an ancient custom,† lays the Bible on the neck of the Bishop before delivering it to him, he will, on receiving it from the senior assistant Bishop, stand and lay the book open upon the Bishop's neck. The lower part of the book will touch the nape of the neck, and the junior assistant Bishop will support the (reversed) book with his two hands. This is done in silence. The Archbishop will then sit in his chair, and receive the Bible from the senior assistant Bishop, and deliver it closed to the consecrated Bishop, who will lay his right hand upon it, whilst the senior assistant Bishop supports the book by holding it on the right side, and the junior assistant Bishop on the left, places his right hand under the book.</p><p align="center">193. <i>The delivery of the Bible.</i></p><p align="center">"<i>Then the Archbishop shall deliver him the Bible, saying.</i>"‡</p><p>"Give heed unto reading, exhortation, and doctrine. Think upon the things</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* The following is the old English rubric:— "Consecratore sedente super faldistorium, in medio majoris altaris, dorso verso ad altare, sedilia episcoporum in modum coronae a dextris et a sinistris electi." Rub. Liber Pont. Exon. Con. Epis.</p><p>† The Old English rubric at the laying the evangeliorum codex on the Bishop's neck, is "Et duo episcopi ponant et teneant evangeliorum codicem super cervicem ejus et scapulas clausum." When the book is <i>delivered </i>later in the Service the rubric is "dat ei evangeliorum codicem." Pont. Saris. et Exon. The direction in the text combines the two rubrics.</p><p>‡ "Then the Archbishop shall lay the Bible upon his neck, saying," &c. Ordination Offices, 1549.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p157"></a>[page 157]</p><p>contained in this Book. Be diligent in them, that the increase coming thereby may be manifest unto all men. Take heed unto thyself, and to doctrine, and be diligent in doing them: for by so doing thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee. *Be to the flock of CHRIST a shepherd, not a wolf; feed them, devour them not. Hold up the weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken, bring again the outcasts, seek the lost. Be so merciful, that you be not too remiss; so minister discipline, that you forget not mercy; that when the chief Shepherd shall appear you may receive the never-fading crown of glory; through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. <i>Amen.''</i></p><p>At the words, "Be to the flock of CHRIST a Shepherd," &c., the senior assistant Bishop, receiving the Pastoral Staff from the junior Bishop, may place the Pastoral Staff with the crook turned towards the Consecrator in the hands of the Bishop, who receives it between his joined hands.</p><p>The newly-consecrated Bishop does not re-assume his mitre till the close of the Service, when if it is his own Cathedral he should be conducted to the Episcopal throne. If in the Cathedral of the province, or other Church, he will go in peace to the sacristy and unvest.</p><p>The Consecrator will unvest at the faldstool.</p><p align="center">194. <i>Number of Chaplains to be </i>"<i>occupied</i>"<i> at Ordinations.</i></p><p>Eight at Consecration of Bishops;# Six at Ordination of Priests and Deacons.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* "Then shall the Archbishop put into his hand the Pastoral Staff, saying, Be to the Flock," &c. Ordination Offices, 1549.</p><p># "Provided always, that every Archbishop, because he must occupy eight chaplains at consecration of Bishops, and every Bishop, because</p><p>he must occupy six chaplains at giving of orders and consecration of churches, may, every one of them, have two chaplains over and above to the number limited unto them (viz., four)," &c. 21 Hen. VIII., c. xiii. s. 24, a.d. 1529. <i>Statutes at large.</i></p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><p>[page 158]</p><p>[This page is blank.]</p></td><td valign="top"> </td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><p>[<a href="p159.html">page 159</a>]</p></td><td valign="top"> </td></tr></tbody></table>



[\[1\]](#_ednref1) "Induct aliam vestem breviorem apertam, ut per scissuras brachia extrahi possint, quod genus vestis Mantelletum vocant. Vestes autem hujusmodi erunt, vel ex lana, vel ex camelotto coloris violacei, nullo autem modo sericeae." Caer. Epis. Lib. i. cap. 1. But see Par. 85, note ‡, subnote 2.

[\[2\]](#_ednref2) The *Mozzetta* is not unlike a properly shaped academical hood, (see p. 20, sec. 19, 20,) except the *caputium* (cowl) is much smaller. The Cardinal's cape has no hood attached. And such is the proper shape of the tippet of the Canons.

[\[3\]](#_ednref3) "Et demum, cum tempus ordinationis instat, hora competenti, Pontifex cappa magna indutus, capellano illam post eum deferente, venit ad Ecclesiam ubi ordinationes fieri debent," &c. Rub. de Ord. Conf. Pont. Rom. There is no difference between the *cappa* and *pluviale*— they both mean a cope. See Gavant. Thes. Liber i. Pars i. Tit. xix.

[\[4\]](#_ednref4) In the First Book of Edward VI. the Confession was remanded to the *Canon missae.*
