---
title: 'Directorium Anglicanum: pages 192 to 200a'
description: 'Directorium Anglicanum: pages 192 to 200a. From Project Canterbury.'
---

<table border="2" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="2"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p192"></a>[page 192]</p><p align="center">X.—An <i>OFFICE </i>to be used in the Restauration of a Church*</p><p>¶ <i>When the Fabrick of a Church is ruined, and a new Church is built upon the same Foundatian; the Bishop attended by his Clergy, shall enter into the Churchyard, and go in Procession round about the Church new built;</i> <i>and recite alternately </i>Psalm 74.</p><p>1. O GOD, wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pasture?</p><p>2. O think upon thy congregation: whom thou hast purchased, and redeemed of old.</p><p>3. Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion, wherein thou hast dwelt.</p><p>4. Lift up thy feet, that thou mayest utterly destroy every enemy: which hath done evil in thy sanctuary.</p><p>5. Thine adversaries roar in the midst of thy congregations: and set up their banners for tokens.</p><p>6. He that hewed timber afore out of the thick trees: was known to bring it to an excellent work.</p><p>7. But now they break down all the carved work thereof: with axes and hammers.</p><p>8. They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the dwelling-place of thy Name, even unto the ground.</p><p>9. Yea, they said in their hearts, Let us make havock of them altogether: thus have they burnt up all the houses of God in the land.</p><p>10. We see not our tokens, there is not one prophet more: no, not one is there among us, that understandeth any more.</p><p>11. O God, how long shall the adversary do this dishonour: how long shall the enemy blaspheme thy Name, for ever?</p><p>12. Why withdrawest thou thy hand: why pluckest thou not thy right hand out of thy bosom to consume the enemy?</p><p>13. For God is my King of old: the help that is done upon earth he doeth it himself.</p><p>14. Thou didst divide the sea through thy power: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters.</p><p>15. Thou smotest the heads of Leviathan in pieces: and gavest him to be meat for the people in the wilderness.</p><p>16. Thou broughtest out fountains and waters out of the hard rocks: thou driedst up mighty waters.</p><p>17. The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the fun.</p><p>18. Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter.</p><p>19. Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy hath rebuked: and how the foolish people hath blasphemed thy Name.</p><p>20. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude of the enemies: and forget not the congregation of the poor for ever.</p><p>21. Look upon the covenant: for all the earth is full of darkness, and cruel habitations.</p><p>22. O let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the poor and needy give praise unto thy Name.</p><p>23. Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily.</p><p>24. Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the presumption of them that hate thee increaseth evermore and more.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* Consecration should take place whenever the site of the Altar is changed, so as to be on new ground, not otherwise.—Ed. Direct. Anglic.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p193"></a>[page 193]</p><p><i>¶ Then entring into the Church, the Bishop and Clergy shall vest themselves;</i> <i>which being done, and the people in their places, the Bishop shall kneel down in the body of the Church, on a footstool raised above the floor and say,</i></p><p>Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy kingdom come; thy Will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven; Give us this day our daily Bread; and forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil.</p><p align="center"><i>¶ The Clergy and people repeating after him every petition.</i></p><p align="center"><i>¶ Then shall the Bishop say,</i></p><p>Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favour, and further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and ended in thee, we may glorifie thy holy Name; and finally, by thy mercy obtain everlasting life; through Jesus Christ our Lord. <i>Amen.</i></p><p align="center"><i>¶ Then the Bishop standing up with his Face to the People, shall pray in the words of </i>Ezra, paucis mutatis, ut sequitur.</p><p>O Lord our God, we are asham’d, and blush to lift up our faces unto thee, O God; for our iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespasses grown up unto the heavens. Since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our Kings, and our Priests, been delivered unto the hands of our enemies, to the sword, and to the spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is this day. And now for a little space hath grace been showed to us from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving from our afflictions. For our God hath not forsaken us, but hath extended mercy to us in the sight of our enemies, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? For we have forsaken thy Commandments which thou hast commanded us by thy Servants the Prophets. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less than our iniqui­ties deserve, and hast given us such a deliverance as this, should we again break these Command­ments? Wouldest not thou be angry with us till thou hadst consumed us? <i>Ezra </i>9.</p><p>O Lord God of heaven and earth, thou art righteous and just and true; thou art also good and gracious, and of great mercy, and of lovingkindness; and though thou hast punished us for our inventions, yet thou hast forgiven our misdeeds, and restor’d us to a rejoycing this day. O give unto us abundance of thy grace, that we may no more provoke thee to anger, or to jealousie; that we may never force thee to severity, and to pour forth thy heavy Judgments upon us; but give us thy holy Spirit to lead us in the ways of righteousness, and to prepare us for thy mercies for ever. Defend thy Church, and bless thine inheritance; feed them, and set them up for ever. So shall we thy people give thee thanks in the congregations of thy redeemed ones, and rejoyce in giving thee praises for the operations of thy hands, who hast mightily delivered thy sons and servants, through Jesus Christ our Lord. <i>Amen.</i></p><p align="center"><i>¶</i> <i>Then shall be said or sung </i>Psalm 144, <i>alternately.</i></p><p>1. Blessed be the Lord my strength: who teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight;</p><p>2. My hope and my fortress, my castle and deliverer, my defender in whom I trust: who subdueth my people that is under me.</p><p>3. Lord, what is man, that thou hast such respect unto him: or the son of man, that thou so regardest him?</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p> </p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p194"></a>[page 194]</p><p>4. Man is like a thing of nought: his time passeth away like a shadow.</p><p>5. Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke.</p><p>6. Cast forth thy lightning, and tear them: shoot out thine arrows, and consume them.</p><p>7. Send down thine hand from above: deliver me, and take me out of the great waters, from the hand of strange children;</p><p>8. Whose mouth talketh of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of wickedness.</p><p>9. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: and sing praises unto thee upon a ten-stringed lute.</p><p>10. Thou hast given victory unto kings: and hast delivered David thy servant from the peril of the sword.</p><p>11. Save me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth talketh of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.</p><p>12. That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may be as the polished corners of the temple.</p><p>13. That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets.</p><p>14. That our oxen may be strong to labour, that there be no decay: no leading into captivity, and no complaining in our streets.</p><p>15. Happy are the people that are in such a case: yea, blessed are the people who have the Lord for their God.</p><p>¶ <i>After which the Bishop, attended with the Clergy, shall go to the Font, and use the same Office as is appointed for the Consecration or Dedication of Churches: and so to the end: Omitting the word </i>[place, <i>or </i>places] <i>because the place was consecrated before and so was the Coemitery. In other things proceed without change.</i></p><p>¶ <i>The first Lesson at Morning Prayer shall be </i>Haggai i.</p><p>¶ <i>The second Lesson, </i>Luke 12, <i>beginning at verse </i>32 <i>to the end.</i></p><p>¶ <i>The Collect, the same as is used in Morning Prayer in the Office of Consecration.</i></p><p align="center"> </p><p align="center">XI.—A Short Office for Expiation and Illustration of a Church <i>desecrated </i>or <i>prophaned.</i></p><p>¶<i> If a Church hath been desecrated by Murther and Bloodshed, by Uncleanness, or any other sort of</i> <i>Prophanation, the Bishop attended by two Priests at least, and one Deacon, shall enter into the</i> <i>Church, which shall be first prepared by cleansings and washings, &c.</i></p><p>¶<i> The Bishop and his Clergy being vested, shall go in Procession about the Church on the inside,</i> <i>saying alternately the Seventh Psalm, and the Ninth Psalm.</i></p><p>¶ <i>After which the Bishop, with his Clergy, shall go to the Holy Table and there kneeling down</i> <i>shall pray.</i></p><p>O Almighty God, Who art of pure eyes and canst not behold impurity, behold the Angels are not pure in thy sight, and thou hast found folly in thy Saints; have mercy upon thy servants, who with repentance and contrition of heart, return unto thee, humbling ourselves before thee in thy holy place. We acknowledge ourselves unworthy to appear in thy glorious presence, because we are polluted in thy sight, and it is just in thee to reject our prayers, and to answer us no more from the place of thy Sanctuary; for wickedness hath reached unto the Courts where thy holy feet have trod, and have defiled thy dwelling-place, even unto the ground, and we by our sins have deserved this calamity. But be thou graciously pleased to return to us as in the days of old, and remember us according to thy former lovingkindnesses in the days of our Fathers. Cast out all iniquity from within us, remove the guilt of that horrible prophanation that hath been committed</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p> </p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p195"></a>[page 195]</p><p>here, that abomination of desolation in the holy place, standing where it ought not; and grant that we may present unto thee pure Oblations; and may be accepted by the gracious interpellation of our High Priest, the most glorious Jesus. Let no prophane thing enter any more into the lot of thine inheritance; and be pleased again to accept the prayers which thy servants shall make unto thee in this place. And because holiness becometh thine house for ever, grant to us thy grace to walk before thee in all holiness of conversation; that we becoming a royal Priesthood, a chosen Generation, a people zealous of good works, thou mayest accept us according to thine own loving-kindness, and the desires of our hearts. O look upon thy most holy Son, and regard the cry of his blood, and let it on our behalf speak better things than the blood of <i>Abel.</i></p><p>O let that sprinkling of the blood of the holy Lamb, who was slain from the beginning of the world, make this place holy and accepted, and purifie our hands and hearts, and sanctifie our prayers and praises, and hallow all our Oblations, and preserve this house, and all the places where thy Name is invocated from all impurity and prophanation for ever; and keep our bodies, and souls, and spirits, unblameable to the coming of our Lord Jesus, Thus, O blessed Father, grant that we being presented unto thee without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, may be cloathed with the righteousness of Saints, and walk in white with the Lamb in the Kingdom of our God for ever and ever. Grant this, O Almighty God, our most gracious Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the Holy Spirit, be all worship, and love, and honour, and glory, from generation to generation for ever. <i>Amen.</i></p><p>¶ <i>Then the Bishop and Clergy arising from their knees shall say the Anathematism unto the </i><font face="Symbol">EufhmismoV</font>,<i> or Acclamation, as in the Form of Consecration: After which, kneeling down, shall be said the Third Prayer placed in that Office a little before the Anathematism. And next to that the Second Prayer which is immediately before that; and then the Prayer of S. Clement.</i></p><p>¶ <i>After which, arising</i> <i>from his knees, the Bishop shall say,</i></p><p>Seeing now, dearly beloved in the Lord, we have by humble prayer implored the mercy of God and his holy Spirit, to take from this place, and from our hearts, all impurity and prophanation, and that we hope by the mercies of God in our Lord Jesus Christ, he hath heard our prayers, and will grant our desires, let us give hearty thanks for these mercies, and say,</p><p>¶ <i>Then shall be said the </i><font face="Symbol">EufhmismoV</font>, <i>or Acclamation, as at the end of the Office of Consecration of Churches, &c.</i></p><p>¶ <i>Then shall the Priest, whom the Bishop shall appoint, begin Morning Prayer.</i></p><p>¶ <i>The Psalms for the day are </i>Psalm 18 <i>and </i>Palm 30.</p><p>¶ <i>The first Lesson is, </i>Zechariah i.</p><p>¶ <i>The second Lesson, </i>Mark xi. <i>unto verse </i>26<i> inclusively.</i></p><p>¶ <i>The Collect is the same with that at Morning Prayer in the Consecration of Churches.</i></p><p>¶ <i>If any Chalice, Paten, Font, Pulpit, or any other Oblation or Utensil for the Church, be at any time newly to be presented, the Bishop is to use the Forms of Dedication of those respective Gifts which are particularly used in the Dedication;</i> <i>and this is to be done immediately after the </i>Nicene Creed, <i>at the time of the Communion;</i> <i>ever adding the Anathematism and Acclamation.</i></p><p align="center">Te decet Hymnus.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p> </p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p196"></a>[page 196]</p><p align="center">XII.—SOLEMN SERVICE SUNG IN PRESENCE OF A BISHOP ASSISTING PONTIFICALLY.</p><p>The Bishop may assist at Solemn Service either vested in cope and mitre or chimere and birretta. On the great Festivals he will always use the former. He will occupy the throne, and be assisted by an Assistant Priest and two Deacons, if possible Canons, in surplice and amyss. Unless the Bishop assists at the throne vested in the sacred vestments he does not use the crosier.</p><p>The celebrant and Sacred Ministers rise as the Bishop approaches the choir.</p><p>The organ should play as the Bishop enters the church. Should the Bishop assist in cope and mitre he will be vested in amice, rochet, alb, girdle, pectoral cross, stole, and cope. These will be brought in succession by the clerks, in the manner given s<i>upra, </i>p. 148.</p><p>The Bishop at first proceeds to the midst of the altar with his assistants, who then retire behind. The celebrant is at the Bishop’s left, the Deacon at the left of the celebrant, the Subdeacon at the left of the Deacon. All the Ministers should be a little in the rear. The Bishop having given up the crosier* and mitre, goes to the north side of the altar, accompanied as above by celebrant and Sacred Ministers, and the Introit will begin, which ended, the Bishop will sing the <i>Pater Noster, Collect for Purity</i>, and the Ten Commandments. The Bishop does not sing any other part of the Service until the final Blessing.</p><p>The Bishop <i>reads secreto </i>from the Service Book, which is held by the clerk appointed (the bearer of the <i>bugia </i>assifting,) four times, viz., 1st, at the Introit; 2nd, the Epistle and Gospel; 3rd, the Offertory; 4th, the Post Com­munion.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* That is, supposing him to be vested in the Sacred vestments, and not in the chimere, when the crosier and mitre are not used.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p197"></a>[page 197]</p><p align="center">XIII.—VARIOUS BENEDICTIONS.</p><p align="center">(translated from the EXETER PONTIFICAL.)</p><p align="center"><i>Form of Blessing the Holy Water.</i></p><p align="center"><i>The Exorcism of the Salt.</i></p><p>I exorcise thee, creature of salt, by the living GOD, + by the true GOD, + by the holy GOD, + by the GOD Who by the prophet Eliseus, commanded thee + to be cast into the water that the barrenness of the water might be healed, that thou mightest be salt exorcised for the spiritual health of believers, and be to all who take thee health of soul and body, that all delusion and wickedness, or crafty deceit of the devil, and every unclean spirit, may flee and depart from the place in which thou art sprinkled, adjured by Him, Who will judge the quick and the dead and the world by fire. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Benediction of the Salt.</i></p><p>Almighty and Everlasting GOD, we implore Thy great mercy, that Thou wouldest deign of Thy lovingkindness to bless + and sancti+fy this creature of salt which Thou hast given for the use of the human race, that it may be to all who take it health of mind and body, that whatever is touched or sprinkled by it may be freed from all uncleanness and may be defended from all attacks of ghostly wickedness, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Exorcism of the Water.</i></p><p>I exorcise thee, creature of water, in the Name of GOD the father Almighty, and in the Name of JESUS CHRIST His son our LORD, and in the virtue of the holy ghost, to become water exorcised to chase away all power of the enemy, and to be able to uproot and overthrow the enemy himself and his apostate angels; by the virtue of the same LORD JESUS CHRIST Who will come to judge the quick and dead and the world by fire. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Benediction of the Water.</i></p><p>GOD, Who for the salvation of the human race, hast hidden even Thy greatest Sacraments in the substance of water; mercifully hear our supplications, and pour upon this element, prepared by divers purifications, the virtue of Thy Bless+ing, that Thy creature obeying Thee in Thy mysteries, may by divine grace be effectual for casting out devils and for driving away diseases, that whatever in the houses or places of the faithful this water has sprinkled, may be cleansed from all uncleanness, and be freed from bale, that there the breath of pestilence, and the destroying blast shall not abide; that all snares of the enemy who lies in wait may be dispersed, and that whatsoever does despite to the safety and quietness of Thy servants may flee by the sprinkling of this water, that health may be fought by the invocation of Thy Holy Name, and may be defended from all assaults, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p> </p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p198"></a>[page 198]</p><p align="center"><i>Then shall the Consecrator cast the salt into the water, and shall say,</i></p><p>This mixture of salt and water together is done in the Name of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST. Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Then shall follow the Benediction of Salt and Water together in this wise.</i></p><p><i>V. </i>The LORD be with you.</p><p><i>R. </i>And with thy spirit.</p><p align="center">Let us pray.</p><p>O Almighty GOD, the Author of victorious power, King of all kings, magnificent conqueror, Who crushest the strength of adverse rule, Who overcomest the bondage of the enemy, Who vanquishest all hostile wickedness; suppliant arid trembling we beseech and implore Thee, O LORD, mercifully to accept this creature of salt and water, and of Thy lovingkindness to illuminate and sancti+fy it with the dew of Thy blessing, that wherever it shall be sprinkled, by the invocation of Thy Holy Name, all malice of the unclean spirit may be driven away, and the terror of the venomous serpent be chased far hence, and that the presence of the HOLY SPIRIT may be vouchsafed to us in every place when we ask Him of Thy tender mercy, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST Thy SON, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee in the unity of the same Spirit, one GOD world without end. Amen.</p><p align="center">(TRANSLATED FROM A MS. IN THE POSSESSION OF THE REV. FREDERICK G. LEE.)</p><p align="center"><i>Of a Chalice and Paten.</i></p><p><i>V. </i>Our help standeth in the Name of the LORD:</p><p><i>R. </i>Who hath made heaven and earth.</p><p><i>V. </i>LORD, hear our prayer.</p><p><i>R. </i>And let our cry come unto Thee.</p><p>The LORD be with you.</p><p>And with thy spirit.</p><p align="center">Let us pray.</p><p>Almighty and Everlasting GOD, Who under the old law willedst that gold and silver should be set apart for Thine honour and worship, vouchsafe, we beseech Thee, to bless +, sanc+tify, and con+secrate this chalice and paten for the ministration of the Eucharist of Thy dearly beloved SON JESUS CHRIST, Who for our salvation offered Himself a Sacrifice on the Altar of the Cross, and now —pleading the same sacrifice—liveth and reigneth with Thee and the holy ghost, ever one GOD, world without end, <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Of a Corporal.</i></p><p><i>V. </i>Our help standeth in the Name of the LORD:</p><p><i>R. </i>Who hath made heaven and earth.</p><p><i>V. </i>LORD, hear our prayer.</p><p><i>R. </i>And let our cry come unto Thee.</p><p>The LORD be with you.</p><p>And with thy spirit.</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p> </p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p199"></a>[page 199]</p><p>O Almighty GOD, we humbly beseech Thee graciously to bless +, sanc+tify, and con+secrate this corporal for the use of Thine Altar, on which is presented to Thee the Sacrifice of Thy clearly beloved SON JESUS CHRIST, and grant that all who assist at these Sacred Mysteries may receive here the virtue of that Sacrament and hereafter everlasting life, through the same JESUS CHRIST our LORD. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Of a Chalice-veil.</i></p><p>Almighty and Everlasting GOD, Whose most blessed SON JESUS CHRIST willed not only to die for our sins, but also to feed us with His most Blessed Body and Blood, bless + and sanc+tify, we beseech Thee, this chalice-veil for the use of Thine Altar, and grant that we who by faith know Thine only begotten SON here, may hereafter behold Him face to face, through the same JESUS CHRIST our LORD. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Of an Alb or Surplice.</i></p><p>O GOD, the Creator and Sanctifier of all things, vouchsafe, we beseech Thee, to bless +, sanc+tify, and con+secrate this alb (or <i>surplice</i>), that they who wear it for Thy glory, may have grace to wash their robes and make them white in the Blood of the lamb, and at last be found meet to worship Thee in heaven for ever, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Of a Maniple or Girdle.</i></p><p>Hear us, Almighty GOD, and vouchsafe to bless +, sanc+tify, and conse+crate this Maniple (or <i>Girdle)</i> prepared for the use of Thy Ministers, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST our LORD. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Of a Stole.</i></p><p>O LORD JESUS CHRIST, SON of the living GOD, Who hast said with Thine own blessed and holy Lips, “Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, for My yoke is easy and My burden is light;” grant that all who wear this stole— which do Thou vouchsafe to bless +, sanc+tify, and conse+crate—may follow Thee in all humi­lity, and at last find eternal rest for their souls, through Thee, O blessed saviour of the world, Who with the father and the holy ghost livest and reignest one GOD world without end. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>Of a Chasuble or Vestment.</i></p><p>O Almighty GOD, vouchsafe, we beseech Thee, to bless +, sanc+tify, and conse+crate this Vestment for the ministry of Thy Holy Altar, and grant that those who use it may gain the graces bought by the Sacrifice of Thy dear SON, through Him Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the holy ghost ever one GOD world without end. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p align="center"><i>A General Benediction.*</i></p><p>Vouchsafe, we beseech Thee, O Almighty GOD, to bless +, sanc+tify, and conse+crate this ———— for Thy service, and grant that we who are permitted to worship Thee in Thy courts</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p>* It is convenient to use this Form for the Blessing of Bells, &c.</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="50%"><p><a name="p200"></a>[page 200 part]</p><p>below may hereafter adore Thee for ever in heaven, through JESUS CHRIST Thine only SON our LORD. <i>R. </i>Amen.</p><p>*<sub>*</sub>* After each and every Benediction the thing blessed should be reverently sprinkled with holy water. See p. 197.</p><p align="center">+<br>A.M.D.G.<br>+</p><p align="center"><i>Old Vestments to be burnt.</i></p><p>“Altaris pallae, cathedrae, candelabrum, et velum, si suerint vetustate consumpta, incendio dentur; quia non licet ea, quae in sacrario suerint, male tractari; sed incendio universa tradantur. Cineres quoque eorum in baptisterium inferantur, ubi nullum transitum habeat; aut in pariete, aut in fossis pavimentorum jactentur, ne introeuntium pedibus inquinentur.” Corpus Juris Can. Vol. i. p. 960.</p><p>And again: “Ligna Ecclesias dedicatae non debent ad aliud opus jungi, nisi ad aliam Ecclesiam, sed igni sunt comburenda.” <i>(Ibid.) Apud </i>Harrington.</p><p>Under the law the old Vestments were made up into wicks for the great candlestick in the Holy Place and the lamps in the Temple.</p><p>[page 200 continues <a href="p200.html">here</a>.]</p></td><td valign="top" width="50%"><p> </p></td></tr></tbody></table>
