---
title: 'Directorium Anglicanum: Index'
description: 'Directorium Anglicanum: Index. From Project Canterbury.'
---

INDEX.

Absolution, the, 93.

,,    in communion service, 49.

,,    position of celebrant during, 49.

,,    ,,    of sacred ministers, 170.

,,    ,,    of acolytes, 172.

,,    ,,    of servers, 174.

Absolution, sacrament of. See Penance.

Abstinence, days of, 84.

Academical square or trencher cap, 13.

Access, prayer of humble, 50.

,,    position of celebrant during, 50.

,,    of sacred ministers, 170.

,,    of acolytes, 172.

,,    of servers, 174.

Acolytes or lay assistants, directions for, 172—173.

Adult baptism, rule for determining which service is to be used in the case of a child past the age of infancy, note \*, 130.

Advent, greater antiphons of, note \*, 113.

Alb, description of, 13.

,,    apparels of, 13.

Alms, manner of collecting, 42.

Alms-bowl, to be kept on the credence, and not on the altar, 28, and note ‡, 41.

Alms-dish. See Offertory Basin, 8.

Altar, not to be embedded or fixed to the wall, 4.

,,    to be raised on a platform, 5.

,,    ascent to by at least two steps, 5.

,,    slab of, to be covered with a cere­cloth, 5.

,,    dimensions of, 3.

Altar, the table of the LORD so called for the first five centuries, note §, 2, 3.

,,    a Scriptural phrase for the LORD’s table, note §, 2, 3.

,,    parts of, 167.

,,    preparation of, for Holy Communion, 165.

,,    its ornaments, 6, 27—31, 165.

,,    furniture of, 8 — 11.

,,    time of veiling for a festival, 25.

,,    no caps, gloves, or handkerchiefs to be placed thereon, note ‡, 31.

,,    curtains to be hung at ends of, 6.

Altar-candlesticks, description of, 9, 10.

Altar-card, no mediaeval authority for, 10.

Altar-cross, description of, 8, 9.

,,    mentioned by Bede, note \*, 8.

Altar-lights, statutable, pref. xvi.

,,    what they symbolize, 9.

,,    used in Queen Elizabeth’s chapel, note \*, 8.

,,    their symbolism as interpreted by the first Injunctions of Edw. VI., note †, 10.

,,    used in the Syriac, the oldest form of the Eastern rite, to this day, note \*, 9.

,,    not to be lighted except at celebrations, note †, subnote 1, 9.

,,    authorities for, note †, 9.

,,    time for lighting, 29, 31.

,,    manner of lighting, 30.

,,    by whom to be lighted, 29.

Altar-lights, testimony of S. Jerome, note ‡, 29.

,,    not *caeca lumina*, testimony of Fuller, note ‡, 29.

,,    in Queen Elizabeth’s chapel, note ‡, 29.

,,    42nd canon, under King Edgar, on, note ‡, 29.

,,    14th canon of Elfric on, note ‡, 30.

,,    testimony of Dr. Donne, note ‡, 30.

,,    testimony of Gregory (1671) note ‡, 30.

,,    testimony of S. Isidore of Seville, note ‡, 30.

,,    statutable, note †,,    9.

,,    list of churches in which used, note ‡, 30, 31,

,,    never to be used as mere candles for lighting the sanctuary, 31.

,,    and other candles, 75.

Altar-stone, subnote 3, 4.

Affusion, 130.

Amice, description of, 16.

Amyss, description of, 21.

,,    by whom worn, subnote 2, 21.

,,    “tippets” of, subnote 3, 21.

Andrewes, Bp. on the word altar, note §, 3.

Anointing of the sick, 138.

,,    office from the First Book of Edw. VI. note \*, 139.

,,    proper method of, note \*, 139.

Anthem, the, 112.

Anthem and introit, rationale of, note †, 31.

Athanasius, S., creed of, 119.

Aumbrye, 7.

Bands, pref. xix, 220.

Banns of marriage, publication of, 38, 39.

Baptism, sacrament of, 125—132.

,,    things to be secured for, 125.

,,    the proper vestments for, 126.

,,    trine immersion, 126.

,,    sprinkling not recognized by the Church of England, 127.

,,    heretical or schismatic, 127.

,,    priest has power to alter improper names, 127.

,,    private, 127—129.

,,    method to be adopted when there are children to be simply admitted into the Church, as well as others to be baptized, 129.

,,    private, vestments for, 128.

,,    baptismal instrumenta, 128.

Baptism, cautions and directions, 131.

,,    rochet, a convenient vestment for, 169.

,,    authority for, note †, 169.

,,    parents not to baptize their own chil­dren, 132.

,,    a priest not to baptize his own child during Divine Service, 132.

Benedictions, various, 197—199.

Bidding of prayer, form of, 215.

Birretta. See Priest’s cap, 22.

,,    on no account to be placed on the altar, note ‡, 31.

Bishop’s throne, proper, position of, 7.

Blessing, the, 58, 59.

,,    position of celebrant, 58, 59.

,,    of sacred ministers, 58.

,,    rationale of, note ||, 58.

,,    manner of, by a Bishop and by a priest, note ‡, 58.

Bowing at the Name of JESUS, enjoined by canon xviii. of 1603/4, note †, 108.

,,    at the Name of JESUS, note \*, 37.

,,    at the Gloria Patri, note \*, 37.

Bread, for Holy Communion, 61.

,,    note \*, 62.

,,    priest’s own, note \*, 53.

,,    and wine, oblation of, 42—44.

,,   ,,    rationale of, note †, 42.

,,   ,,    the oblations,,    42.

Burial, the, of the dead, 140—142.

,,    proper vestments, 140.

,,   ,,    when there is a celebration, note †, 140.

,,    holy communion at, 140, 141.

Burse, description of, note †, 27.

Calendar, the, 76—85. Canon, the, 50.

,,    position of celebrant during, 50—53.

,,    ,,    of sacred ministers, 170.

,,   ,,    of acolytes, 172.

,,   ,,    of servers, 174.

,,    taken from the Sarum rite, note †, 50.

Canticles, the, 103.

Cassock, description of, 12, 13.

Cautels and directions, 71.

Cautels and directions for officiant in divine office, 118.

Celebrant, directions for, 166 —169.

Celebration, hour of, 29.

,,    afternoon, condemnation of, 29.

Cere-cloth, note ‡, 5.

Chalice, description of, 8.

,,    and paten, manner of placing upon the altar at the beginning of the celebra­tion, 27, 28.

,,    at oblation of the elements, 28, 44, 47.

,,    after the communion of the faithful, 28.

Chalice, is placed on the altar without the veil when a bishop celebrates, note ‡, 43.

Chalices and patens, directions as to, 177.

Chalice cover of linen and lace, dimensions of, note †, 27.

Chalice-veil of silk, dimensions of, note †, 27.

Chancel, to be separated from nave by rood-screen, 87.

,,    no laymen, save singers, to have their place there, note ‡, 86.

,,    subnote 3, 86.

Chasuble, description of, 15.

,,    called by way of excellency “ the vestment,” 15.

Chesible. See Chasuble, 15.

Chimere, subnote 2, 74.

Chirothecae. See Gloves, 18.

Choir, manner of leaving, 117.

,,    mode of proceeding to, 89.

,,    tippet. See Amyis, 21.

Chorister, form of admission of, 202.

,,    prayers for, 25, 26.

Church militant prayer, pre-reformation prayer with same title, note, \*, 46, 47.

,,    position of deacon and subdeacon at,

,,    48. Churching, the, of women, 143, 144.

,,    proper vestments, 144.

Churchwardens, duty of, in regard to “orna­ments,” pref. xviii, note \*.

Ciborium, used instead of the paten in commu­nicating the faithful, note \*, 55.

,,    description of, note \*, 55.

Cleansing of church furniture, 212.

Clergyman’s sore throat, note †, 100.

Cloak, mentioned in 2 S. Tim. iv. 13, considered to be the Eucharistic vestment, subnote 1, 16.

Collects in communion office, number of, to be faid, their rationale, 35, 36.

Collect for the Queen, position of priest at, 33.

,,    position of deacon and subdeacon, at, 169.

,,    second collect; to be preferred, 33.

,,    head of seasons, 83.

Collect, memorial, when Sunday collect is to be added to that of the Saint’s day, 81.

,,    to be said after the offertory, 59.

,,    for the day, 34.

,,    use of on vigils, eves, and evensong, 80.

,,    general rule for using of, first evensongs, 80.

,,    epistles, and gospels, 123, 124.

,,    to be said standing, 117.

Collection, a, after office, 119.

Colours, canonical, 23, 24.

,,    of the day, to be used on the minor festivals, subnote 1, 38.

,,    Sarum use of, note †, 23.

Commandments and Kyrie Eleisons, 32, 33.

,,    ,,    rationale of, note §,32, 33.

Commemoration of the living and the dead, 48. Commination, a, 144, 145.

,,    proper vestments, 144.

,,    “ reading-pew,” what, 145.

,,    position of litany-stool during, 145.

Communion, notice of. See Notices.

,,    warning of, 38. of priest, 54, 55.

,,    position of sacred ministers during, 55, 170.

,,    of acolytes, 173.

,,    of servers, 175. of clergy, 55.

,,    of choir, 55.

,,    of the faithful, 55, 56.

,,    or houselling cloth, 29.

,,    holy, signifies the receptionary part of the office, subnote 1, 23.

,,    so used in 1547, subnote 1, 23.

,,    the, of the sick, 137—140.

,,    proper vestments, 137.

,,    ,,    instrumenta, 137, 138.

,,    priest to have a server, note †, 137. Concurrence of holy days, 79.

,,    of first and second evensongs of festivals, 80.

,,    Confession, the general, 93.

,,    in Communion service, 48.

,,    position of celebrant during, 48, note †, 49, 72. \_

,,    ,,    of sacred ministers, 48, 72.

Confirmation, the order of, 132—136.

,,    proper vestments for Bishop, 133.

,,    ,,    for clergy, &c. 133.

,,    position of episcopal chair, 133.

Confirmation, dress for females at, 133,

Consecration, prayer of. See Canon, 50.

,,    in one kind, 56.

,,    in one kind, rubric concerning, a transcript of the Sarum cautel, 57.

,,    of churches, form of, according to the use of the Church of Ireland, 181.

Consumption and purification, 62.

Cope, 21.

,,    used in the University of Cambridge, 21.

,,    used at solemn vespers, 21.

,,    at processions and funerals, 12.

,,    Cambridge description of, 21, 22.

,,    to be worn at solemn vespers, 118.

Coronation service, oblation of, elements, note \*, 28.

,,    secreta of, note \*, 28.

,,    Queen’s second oblation, note \*, 28.

Corporals, washing of, 75.

,,    not to be touched by laics without permission, note ‡, 75.

,,    mediaeval practice concerning, note §,75.

Cotta. See Surplice, 19.

Cowle, See Academical Hood, 20.

Credence, 6, 7, 28.

,,    authorized by the Privy Council, 225.

,,    how veiled, 28.

,,    preparation of, 28, 29.

Creed, Apostles’, 106.

,,    the Nicene, 37.

,,    position of celebrant at, 37, 168.

,,    to be said with everything after in the midst of the altar, 37.

Cross, sign of, 166.

,,    note †, 91.

,,    not included in the order to destroy images, note \*, 8.

,,    in most ancient illuminations of altars is displayed, and not the crucifix, note \*, 8.

,,    the present Roman rule obeyed if a simple cross, and not a crucifix, be placed on the super-altar, note \*, 8. Croyzer, 18.

Crozier, description of, 18.

Crucifix, statutable, pref. xix, 222, 224.

,,    on the altar in Queen Elizabeth’s chapel, note \*, 8.

Cruets, 8.

Curtains. See Altar, 6.

Cushions, not allowed upon the altar. See desk,25.

Daily eucharist, 60, 61.

,,    those who communicate spiritually to be counted in so as to form a quorum, note \*, 61.

,,    when the oblation is made the service must go on, note \*, 61.

Dalmatic, description of, 16, 17.

,,    symbolism of, subnote 1, 17.

,,    the episcopal, 17.

Deacon, prayers for when veiling, 26.

,,    vestments of, 12, 219, 221.

,,    proper place when ministering at the altar, note †, 43.

,,    assistant, vestments of, 25.

,,    directions for, in office, note †, 93.

Desk, for altar, 25.

Devotion, feasts of, 210.

Divine service, a direct tradition from the old

English term for the ‘‘hours,” subnote 1,14.

,,    office, to precede holy communion, note \*, 2.

Dominus vobiscum, the, 108.

Duplication, 64.

Elements, prayer when they are set apart in the sacristy, subnote 2, 42.

,,    the, 161 —163.

,,    to be placed on credence before the celebration begins, note †, 28.

,,    Sarum (and old French) use allowed it till the first collect, note †, 28.

,,    in the Syriac, quite at the beginning, note †, 28.

,,    strictly speaking mould accompany the introit, note †, 28.

,,    may be brought in at the anthem, note †,28.

,,    must never be placed on credence *before* matins or *earlier* than the anthem, note †, 28.

,,    by whom placed on credence, note †, 28.

Elevation of paten, 53.

Ember collects, 122.

Embroidery, definition of, pref. xxiv, note \*.

Epistle, note †, 34, 37.

,,    everything before, to be said at the north-side, 37.

,,    book of, to be placed on credence, note †, 25.

Epistoler or subdeacon, not to wear the stole, note †, 2.

Epistoler or subdeacon, prayers for, when veil­ing, 26.

,,    vestments of, 12, 219, 221.

Epitrachelion, of the east, answers to the stole of the west, 15.

Eucharist, holy, a term much more frequent in the English than in the Roman use, 1.

Eucharistic office, note †, 31.      

,,    vestments, statutable, pref. xvi.

Eves, 79.

Exhortation and invitatory, 48.

,,    the, 92.

Expiation and illustration of a church *desecrated* or *prophaned*, short office for, 194.

Fair white linen cloth, 25.

,,    not to cover the antependium, note \*, 25.

,,    the, may be richly worked in scarlet or blue for festivals, so the work be not embroidery, (see Embroidery) but must not be fringed with lace, pref. xxiv, 216.

Fastings, days of, 84.

Festivals, subnote 1, 38.

Flagon. See Cruets, 8.

Floral decoration, 204—209.

Flowers on the altar, 210.

Flower vases, 210.

Fraction of the bread, note ‡, 50.

,,    53.

,,    after consecration, note †, 53.

Fridays, how to be marked, 85.

Girdle of alb, 16.

Gloria, the, 95.

,,    in excelsis, 58.

,,   ,,    used in the English rite not as a preliminary hymn but as a thanksgiving, note †, 58.

,,   ,,    position of celebrant during, 58.

,,    ,,    of sacred ministers, 58.

,,    ,,    of acolytes, 173.

,,    ,,    of servers, 175.

,,    ,,    of the faithful, 58. Gloves, episcopal, description of, 18.

,,    Wykeham’s, subnote 1, 18.

,,    not to be worn by priests with the vestments of the church, subnote 4,16.

Gospel, note †, 34, 37.

Gospels, book of, to be placed on credence, note †,25.

Gospeller and epistoler stand facing the east, 2.

,,    parts of service which may be said by them, 2.

,,    notes † and ‡, 34,

“Gray amice,” subnote 2, 21.

Gray amys, note †, 89.

Gremial, the, 71.

Hands, position of, 92.

Holy days, which take precedence of other holy days, 82.

,,    services of, not to be mingled, 83.

Holy Eastern Church, eucharistical vestments of, subnote 5, 14.

Hood, academical, proper shape of, 20.

,,    not to be used together with the ancient vestments, 40.

,,    not worn with the eucharistic vestments, nor by any assisting at the celebration, 25.

,,    in the Roman Church, the religious orders who wear them adjust them under the ecclesiastical vestments, note ‡, 25.

Houfelling cloth. See Communion cloth, 29.

Hymns, 113.

Immersion, 130.

Incense, authorities for, 10, 11.

Introit and anthem, rationale of, note †, 31.

Inventories of church goods taken in the reign of King Edward VI. in the Record Office, at Carlton Ride, 222—224.

Invocation, supplemental prayer of, note \*, 51,52.

Kneeling, when celebrant kneels in Communion service, note \*, 50.

Lesser litany, 108.

,,    LORD’s Prayer after, 109.

Lessons, the, must belong to the same service as epistle and gospel, 83.

,,    the, 99.

,,    reading of, 100.

Liripipe, description of, 20,

Litany, the, 120—122.

,,    proper vestments, 120.

,,    position of litany desk, 121. Litany, its penitential aspect, note †, 31.

Litany, rationale of, in connexion with the liturgy, note †, 31.

Liturgy, the celebration of the Holy Eucharist, note †\* subnote 1, 1,2.

Locker. See Aumbrye, 7.

LORD’s Prayer in office, 94.

LORD’s Supper, term of, first introduced in Ed­ward VI.’s first book, subnote 1, 23.

,,    signifies the consecration as distinct from the communion, subnote 1, 23.

Lotio manuum, 44, 45.

,,    authorities for, notes †, 44, and \*, †, ‡, 45.

Magnificat, incense formerly used at, 117.

Maniple, description of, 16.

,,    always worn by celebrant and sacred ministers, 12, 148, 219—221.

Mass, the common name for the sacrament of the LORD’s Supper in the time of Elizabeth, subnote 1, 1.

,,    the sacrament of the LORD’s Supper so called in the first book of Edw. VI. note \*, 1.

,,    has no connection with the doctrine of transubstantiation, subnote 1, 1.

Matins and evensong, 86—117.

,,    hour of, note †, 86.

Matrimony, the form of solemnization of, 134— 136.

,,    proper vestments, 134.

,,    ,,    to be used when there is a celebration, 135.

Mensa, 4, 5.

Ministerium, note \*, 43.

Missa sicca, 59.

,,    rationale of, note †, 59.

,,    vestments of priest, 61, 164.

,,    only allowable on Good Friday, note †, 61.

Mitre, description of the three sorts of, 17.

,,    manner of serving, note \*, 74.

Music of the English Church, 178—180.

Non-communicants, presence of, at celebration of Holy Eucharist, 55.

North-fide of the altar, rationale of, note \*, 33.

,,    explained, 167.

Norwegian church, altar-steps, chasuble, &c., used as in the west, subnote 2, 15.

Notices of holy days, &c., 37, 38.

,,    of minor festivals, note †, 37.

,,    of communion, 38.

Oblations, refers exclusively to the elements, note §, 45.

,,    manner of making, 46, 47.

,,    ancient English use of making, note §, 45.

Oblation of the elements, chalice and paten how placed at, note \*, 27.

,,    the Sarum custom the same, note \*, 27.

,,    the present Roman custom the fame, though different before the fifteenth century, note \*, 27.

,,    how ordered according to the most ancient rite, viz., the Syriac liturgy of S. James, note \*, 27.

Obligation, feasts of, 210.

Occurrence of holy days, 79.

,,    ,,    and memorial collect, 81.

,,    of eves, 81.

Octaves, 83.

Offertory, 41.

,,    position of celebrant at, 41.

,,    rationale of, note †, 41.

,,    sentences of, at solemn and plain service, note ‡, 41.

,,    basin, 8.

Office, the Roman term for the “hours,” subnote l, 14.

Oil of chrism, 200.

,,    of the sick, 200.

,,    holy, 200.

,,    may be consecrated by a priest, 201.

,,    consecrated by the Bishop in mediaeval times as a matter only of convenience and discipline, 201.

Orationes, the, 111.

Oremus, the, 108.

Order of the administration of the LORD’s Supper, an ellipse for the order of administration of the sacrament of the LORD’s Supper, note \*,23.

Ordinal, the, 146—147.

,,    Lutheran and Calvinist ministers being laymen are to be ordained, note ‡, 146.

,,    deacons, form and manner of making, 147—152.

,,    priests, form and manner of ordering, 152—155.

,,    archbishop or bishop, form of ordaining or consecrating, 154—157.

Ornaments of the church, 216—219.

,,    of the ministers, 219—222.

,,    statutable authority for, pref. xiv—xvii.

,,    of the ministers, statutable authority for, pref. xiv—xvii.

,,    the incumbent concerned in ordering them as well as the churchwardens, pref. xviii, note \*.

,,    the liability of the parishioners, pref. xviii, note \*.

,,    ,,    of the priest, xviii, note \*.

Orphreys, description of, 16.

Ostension of chalice, note \*, 53.

Pall, archiepiscopal description of, 19.

,,    for chalice, description of, note †, 27.

Pastoral staff, description of, 18.

,,    executed by G. E. Street, Esq. for the late lamented Bp. of Graham’s town, 18.

Pater noster and collect for purity, 32.

,,    position of priest at, 32.

,,    to be said by the priest alone, 32.

,,    rubric concerning the LORD’s Prayer at matins does not govern the Communion office, note †, 32.

,,    position of, in the ancient liturgies, note †, 32,

,,    still a praeparatio ad missam, note ‡, 32.

,,    rationale of the “Amen” at the end of the LORD’s Prayer and of the collect for purity, note ‡, 32.

Paten, description of, 8.

Penance, sacrament of, 201.

Phaenolion, of the east, answers to the chasuble of the west, 15.

,,    derived from the “curious ephod,” subnote 1, 15.

Piscina, 7.

Plain service, 64, 71.

Position of celebrant, sacred ministers, and acolytes, at the beginning of the celebration, 32.

,,    priest with gospeller on his right, and epistoler on his left hand, stands on ascending the platform at first in centre of the altar, 32.

,,    at ringing of the introit priest goes to north-side, the gospeller standing on the second step at his right, the epistoler on the third step on the right of the gospeller, note \*, 32.

Position: deacon and subdeacon, at the commandments, standing on their respective steps on the epistle side facing the east, 32.

,,    normal, of priest, 72.

,,    of sacred ministers, 72.

,,    of those in choir, 72.

,,    hands and feet, note \*, 32.

Post communion, the, 57, 58.

,,    position of sacred ministers during, 57, 171.

,,    of acolytes, 173.

,,    of servers, 175.

Post S. Eucharistiam, 27.

Praeparatio ad S. Eucharistiam, 27.

Praise of the office, 95 —106.

Prayers for celebrant, sacred ministers, choristers, &c. when vesting, 25, 26.

,,    for the Queen’s Majesty, 114.

,,    for the royal family, 115.

,,    for the clergy and people, 115.

,,    for all conditions of men, 115.

,,    of S. Chrysostom, 115.

,,    benediction, 116.

,,    occasional, the, 122, 123.

Preacher in Communion office, 40.

,,    how vested if the celebrant, 40.

,,    ,,    if deacon or subdeacon, 40.

,,   ,,    if not one of the sacred ministers, 40.

,,    not to kneel in pulpit, 41.

,,    after office, dress of, 119.

Preces, the, 110.

,,    secretae from Sarum missal, 53, 54.

Preface, 49.

,,    position of celebrant at, 49.

,,    of sacred ministers, 170.

,,    of acolytes, 170.

,,    of servers, 174.

Prefaces, proper, 83.

Preparatio ad chorum, 88.

Priest, prayers for, when vesting, 26.

,,    position of, at north-side, 2.

Priest, when he reads the epistle and gospel ought to go off the footpace, 2.

,,    ought not to leave the footpace as a general rule, 2.

,,    fulfilling the function of deacon to wear the proper diaconal vestments, note †, 2.

Prime function, the, 106—117.

Privy Council, judgment of, in the case of the Knightsbridge churches, 224, 225.

,,    comment thereon by J. D. Chambers, Esq., M.A., recorder of Salisbury, 225.

Proanaphoral service, note †, 59, 60.

Procession and introit, 31, 32.

Processional banners, 215.

,,    cross, 215.

,,    in Lent, of wood, painted red, note \*, 215.

Processions, order of, 91, 213.

Psalms, the, 97.

,,    gloria, 98.

Pyx, used instead of the paten in communicating the faithful, note \*,55.

,,    description of, note \*, 55.

,,    the authorized vessel in the Church of England, note \*, 55.

Rationale, description of, 19.

Reconsecration and reconciling of churches, 200.

Reredos, served in mediaeval times as the super-altar of the present day, 229.

,,    super-altar to be preferred to the reredos for the cross and lights, 229.

Restoration of a church, office to be used in, ac­cording to the use of the Church of Ireland, 192.

Ring, episcopal, description of, 18.

,,    symbolism of, subnote 5, 18.

,,    Abp. Lee’s (of York), subnote 6, 18.

,,    not to be worn by priests with the vestments of the church, subnote 4, 16.

Rochet, the, 74.

Rogation days, 85.

,,    banners for perambulation, 85.

Ruff, academical, subnote 1, 21.

Sacrament, blessed, how to receive, note \*, 56.

,,    dropping particles of, sacrilege, note \*, 56, 162.

Sacred ministers (deacon and subdeacon) direc­tions for, 169—171.

Sacristans, rules for, 209.

Sacristy, rules for, 211.

Sanctuary, how to be lighted at evensong, &c. note †, subnote 1, 9.

Sandlus, 49.

Sandal, description of, 18.

,,    Bishop Waneflete’s, subnote 2, 18.

Scarf, pref. xix, 220.

Sedilia, 7.

,,    not to be used during office, 91.

Sentences, the, 92.

Septum, 7.

Sermon in Communion office, 39, and note \*.

,,    how to be preceded, 40.

,,    no prayer before to be used, 40.

,,    doxology at end of, to be said turning eastwards, 41.

Service, the old Sarum term for the “ hours,” subnote 1, 14.

Servers, directions for, 173—176.

,,    celebration with two, 176.

Shirt-collars, not to be worn with the vestments of the church, subnote 4, 16.

Solemn service, sung in presence of a Bishop assisting pontifically, 196.

,,    in the absence of a subdeacon, 171, 172.

Spiritual communion, 139.

,,    the same provision to be found in the pre-reformation service books, 139.

Sponsor, the father may not be ; the mother may, note \*, 125.

“Standing before the table,” rationale of, note §, 51.

Statute, 25 Henry VIII. c. 19, note †, 9.

,,    gives to ancient canon law the force of statute law, note †, 9.

,,    with what limitations, note †, 9.

Stole, description of, 13.

,,    spoken of under the name of orarium at the council of Laodicea, 13.

Subdeacon. See Sacred Ministers and Solemn Service.

,,    or epistoler, not to wear the stole, note †, 2.

Sudarium, 18.

Sundays before Advent, 123.

,,    which take precedence of Saints’ days, 82.

Surplice, 19.

Super-altar, description of, 5, 6.

,,    ornaments to be placed on, 6.

Super-frontal, 6.

Super-frontal, to be vested with three linen cloths, which always remain thereon; the whole to be covered with a strip of green silk, except during the celebration of the Holy Eucharist, note \*, 6.

Sursum corda, 49.

Sursum corda, position of celebrant at, 49.

,,    of sacred ministers, 170.

,,    of acolytes, 172, 173.

,,    of servers, 174.

Swedish churches, veiled altars, crosses, altar-lights, and vestments, used therein, as in the west, subnote 2, 15.

Thanksgiving, general, 115,

Throat, relaxed, Mr. Macready’s opinion as to the cause of, note \*, 40.

Throne proper, Bishop’s, position of, note \*, 133,

,,    position during any function at the altar, note \*, 133.

Tippet, description of, 20.

Translation of festivals, 82.

Tunic, description of, 17.

,,    the episcopal, 17.

Tunicles, 17.

Veiling of blessed sacrament, 57.

,,    description of veil, note \*, 57.

Venite, the, 96.

Verger’s staff, 215.

Versicles, 95.

,,    and response, 95.

Vestments, description of, 12—22.

,,    Eucharistic, 12.

,,    for the celebrant, 12, 220.

,,    colours of, 163, 164.

,,    fashion of, 164, 165.

,,    for the sacred ministers, 12, 219.

,,    episcopal, 12, 220.

Vestments, for the daily office, 12, 15.

,,    for daily service, 88, 89.

,,    old, to be burnt, 200.

,,    of first book of Edward VI., 72.

,,    arrangement of, for solemn service by a Bishop in his own diocese, 73.

,,    arrangement of where there is no sacristy, 74.

,,    the fame, with very insignificant modi­fications, throughout the universal Church, subnote 2, 15.

,,    not peculiar to the Roman Church, subnote 3, 15.

,,    of catholic use, subnote 2, 15.

Vestry, rules for. See Sacristy.

Vexillum, 18.

Vigils, 79.

Visitation of the sick, order for, 136, 137.

,,    accustomed form of making a confession, 136.

,,    proper vestments, 136.

,,    absolution, 136.

Wine, for holy communion, 62, and note †, 62.

Words, comfortable, 49.

,,    position of celebrant at, 49.

,,    of sacred ministers, 170.

,,    of acolytes, 172, 173.

,,    of servers, 174.

,,    of institution, all that is necessary for valid consecration, note †, 56.

Zucchetto. See skull-cap, subnote 1, 13.
