---
title: 'Directorium Anglicanum: Preliminaries'
description: 'Directorium Anglicanum: Preliminaries. From Project Canterbury.'
---

<table border="2" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="2"><tbody><tr><td><p>[page ii]</p><p>“Let this Sacrament be in such wise done and ministered . . . . as the good Fathers in the Primitive Church frequented it.”—<i>Homil</i>. <i>B</i>. ii.</p><p>“Here you have an Order for Prayer and for the Reading of Holy Scripture much agreeable to the mind and purpose of the Old Fathers.”—<i>Prayer Book</i>.</p><p>“Whosoever, through his private judgment, willingly and purposely, doth openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of <font size="2">THE</font> C<font size="2">HURCH</font>, which be not repugnant to the Word of G<font size="2">OD</font>, and be ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly.”—<i>Art</i>. xxxiv.</p></td></tr><tr><td><p>[page iii]</p><p align="center">TO THE ARCHBISHOPS AND BISHOPS</p><p align="center">IN VISIBLE COMMUNION</p><p align="center">WITH THE SEE OF CANTERBURY</p><p align="center">THIS MANUAL</p><p align="center">IS WITH EVERY FEELING OF PROFOUND RESPECT</p><p align="center">MOST HUMBLY DEDICATED.</p></td></tr><tr><td><p>[page iv]</p><p><i>Extract from a Charge delivered to the Clergy of New Zealand</i>, September 23, 1847. By George Augustus, Lord Bishop of New Zealand. London : Rivingtons, 1849.</p><p>“The care of sacred things is not an idolatry of inanimate matter, but a recognition of the unseen G<font size="2">OD</font>, to whose service they have been dedicated. It has been deemed worthy of record in the Gospel that C<font size="2">HRIST</font>, when He had ended His reading, closed the book, and delivered it to the minister, to be, no doubt, deposited in the proper place, to be preserved from injury and desecration. No event ever happened on earth more awful than the Resurrection, yet it was a work not unworthy of the care of the angels, even at that solemn season to lay the linen clothes by themselves, and to wrap together the napkin that was about the head in a place by itself. Even the linen cloth which had touched the most holy fin-offering was holy in the fight of those heavenly ministers.”</p></td></tr></tbody></table>
