---
title: William Edward Wyatt
description: William Edward Wyatt. From Project Canterbury.
---

A Memorial of the Rev. William Edward Wyatt, D.D.
Rector of St. Paul's Parish, Baltimore.

The Steward of God: A Sermon
By the Rev. C. C. Grafton, LL. B.
Preached in St. Paul's Church, Baltimore.

Published by the Vestry.
Baltimore: Printed by John D. Toy, 1864.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH,

WILLIAM EDWARD WYATT was born in Manchester, in the British Province of Nova Scotia, on the ninth day of July, seventeen hundred and eighty-nine. The next year his parents removed to the City of New York, where he was brought up, and educated at Columbia College, in the same class with the two Bishops Onderdonk, Bishop Kemper, and Judge Murray Hoffman. He took the degree of B. A. in eighteen hundred and nine, and that of M. A. in eighteen hundred and sixteen. It should be mentioned that he received his preparatory education at the school of the Reverend William Barry, who educated many distinguished clergymen and laymen.

He soon devoted himself to the sacred ministry, commenced the study of theology under the direction of Doctor, afterwards Bishop, Hobart, and was admitted a Candidate for Orders about a month after his graduation. He was ordained Deacon by Bishop Benjamin Moore, in September, eighteen hundred and ten, and Priest by Bishop Hobart in October, eighteen hundred and thirteen. On the eighth of February, eighteen hundred and eleven, he was settled as the minister of the Church in Newtown, Long Island, and, during his residence there, officiated for several months on Sunday afternoons in the City of New York, in connection with Trinity Church.

On the first of October, eighteen hundred and twelve, he married Miss Frances Billop, with whom he lived happily more than fifty-one years. They were not separated until after he was confined to his bed by his last sickness. She bore him eleven children"seven sons and four daughters"of whom five sons and three daughters survive; two of the sons are clergymen of the Church.

In the spring of eighteen hundred and fourteen he was chosen Associate Rector of St. Paul's Parish, Baltimore. The senior Associate Rector was the Reverend James Kemp, D. D., who, on the first of September following, was consecrated Suffragan Bishop of Maryland, with a right of succession to the Diocesan Episcopate, which afterwards took effect. By this event Dr. Wyatt ceased, as the law then stood, to be Associate Rector, and became Associate Minister, with the right of succession to the rectory. To this office he was instituted in Christ Church, then a chapel of ease to St. Paul's Parish, on the sixteenth of October, eighteen hundred and fourteen. In October, eighteen hundred and twenty-seven, he became, upon the death of Bishop Kemp, the sole rector, and continued such until his death, on the twenty-fourth of June, eighteen hundred and sixty-four, more than fifty years after he had entered upon the duties of Associate Rector.

During this time he twice visited Europe, in eighteen hundred twenty-two and eighteen hundred forty-five. So early as eighteen hundred eighteen, he was elected Professor of Theology in the University of Maryland, and in eighteen hundred twenty received from that Institution the degree of Doctor in Divinity. It is more important to remember that, for many years, he acted as the gratuitous Chaplain of the Maryland Penitentiary, with great industry and zeal and with very good effect.

From the Diocese of Maryland he received all the honors which she could bestow, except the Episcopate. He was very early elected a member of the Standing Committee, and continued one until his death, except during the time in which he filled the office of President of the Convention. In his earlier years he was Secretary, and in his later, President of the Committee. He was also, for some years, Secretary of the Convention. He was elected a member of the General Convention in eighteen hundred seventeen, and sat in every Convention afterwards until his death, when he was the oldest member of the House of Clerical and Lay Delegates. In eighteen hundred twenty-eight he was chosen President of the House, and afterwards re-elected seven times, until in eighteen hundred fifty-three he declined a re-election.

Upon the meeting of the Diocesan Convention in eighteen hundred twenty-eight, when the Episcopate was vacant by the death of Bishop Kemp, he was chosen by the High Churchmen of the Diocese to be their candidate for the succession. A majority of the clergy, sympathizing with the party, which called itself Evangelical, preferred Dr. Johns, now Bishop of Virginia. They were, however, not strong enough to nominate him to the laity, because the Constitution of the Diocese required, for that purpose, a two-thirds vote. Of the laity a very large majority preferred Dr. Wyatt. The majority was more than enough to overbalance, in joint ballot, the majority of the clergy. Dr. Wyatt was elected President of the Convention, and was annually re-elected during the vacancy in the Episcopate. This gave him, under the Diocesan Constitution, all the authority of a Bishop of Maryland, so far as it could be exercised by one who was not a Consecrated Bishop. The consecration of Bishop Stone on the twenty-first of October, eighteen hundred and thirty, determined the office of the President of the Convention.

Bishop Stone died in February, eighteen hundred and thirty-eight, before the meeting Of the Convention for that year. When the meeting took place, Dr. Wyatt was nominated for President, but Dr. Johns was elected by a majority of one. It being afterwards discovered that one or more votes had been cast for Dr. Johns by persons who were not properly entitled to seats in the Convention, he very honorably offered to resign; but the Convention unanimously refused to accept the resignation. Drs. Wyatt and Johns were nominated to fill the vacant Episcopate, when Dr. Wyatt read a document, signed by both, declining an election, and recommending Dr. Alonzo Potter, now Bishop of Pennsylvania. This compromise was not approved by a majority of the clergy, and a candidate was nominated in opposition to Dr. Potter, Dr. Henshaw, afterwards Bishop of Rhode Island. Dr. Potter's name was then withdrawn, and several ballots taken among the clergy, sometimes the candidates being Dr. Wyatt and Dr. Johns, and sometimes Dr. Potter and Dr. Johns. None of the three were able to obtain a two-thirds vote. Finally, all three names were withdrawn, and an informal ballot of the clergy was taken between the Reverend Dr. Hawks and the Reverend Dr. Eastburn, now Bishop of Massachusetts. The informal ballot was in favor of Dr. Eastburn by a very small majority. In compliance with an agreement previously entered into, he was constitutionally nominated and confirmed.

Dr. Eastburn having declined the election, a special Convention was held on the second of August, eighteen hundred and thirty-eight. After many ballots among the clergy, in which Dr. Wyatt, Dr. Johns and Dr. Henshaw were named, the two first named formally retired from the contest. Dr. Wyatt then asked leave to name four clergymen, among whom he hoped that a choice might be made. They were Bishop Kemper, then a Missionary Bishop, now Bishop of Wisconsin, Dr. Whittingham, now Bishop of Maryland, Dr. Taylor, of Grace Church, New York, and Mr. Johnson, of Alexandria. After some conversation, during which it appeared that Dr. Kemper would be agreeable to Dr. Johns, but not to all his friends, Dr. Wyatt formally nominated Bishop Kemper, and he was elected, by large majorities of both Orders, but declined serving.

At the annual Convention of eighteen hundred thirty-nine an attempt was made to continue Dr. Johns in the chair, by refusing to go into an election of President. If the vote were taken by Orders, a majority of the clergy would have been able to prevent an election; but Dr. Johns defeated the movement by resigning. Dr. Wyatt was elected President, and again in the following year. During this Convention, it was agreed to submit the names of the Reverend Dr. Hawks and the Reverend Dr. Dorr, of Philadelphia, to a joint ballot, and that he who had the majority on that ballot should not be opposed at the constitutional election. One hundred and nine votes were cast, of which Dr. Dorr received sixty-six, and Dr. Hawks forty-two. The former was afterwards constitutionally elected; but he also refused to serve.

In November, eighteen hundred thirty-nine, another special Convention was held, in which Dr. Wyatt presided, and, in his address, withdrew his name as a candidate. It was agreed that two names should be submitted to the Convention, and that the Orders should ballot for them separately until the same person should have received two-thirds of the votes of both Orders, when a constitutional election should be gone into. The names fixed upon were those of Dr. Whittingham and the Reverend H. V. D. Johns. Nine ballots took place, in each of which Dr. Whittingham had a majority of both Orders, but not two-thirds of either. At the tenth ballot both names were withdrawn, and those of Drs. Wyatt and John Johns substituted for them. Among the clergy Dr. Johns had a majority of one vote. Among the laity Dr. Wyatt had a majority of eight. He then finally withdrew his name, which was not afterwards used. The Convention then proceeded to a constitutional ballot between Dr. Taylor, of New York, who had been nominated by Dr. Wyatt, and Dr. John Johns. On two ballots Dr. Taylor had a majority, but nothing like a two-thirds vote. He was then dropped, and the late Dr. George McElhiney nominated. Dr. Johns received the majority. Dr. Whittingham was then renominated, and in five ballots obtained a majority, but still not a two-thirds vote. The Convention adjourned without a choice. In the annual Convention of eighteen hundred and forty, Dr. Whittingham was elected without opposition. He was consecrated on the seventeenth of September in that year, and Dr. Wyatt finally ceased to be President of the Convention.

In closing this brief sketch of the life of Dr. Wyatt, it is thought unnecessary to add any thing in the nature of a view of his character, since that will be found admirably given in the eloquent sermon of the Reverend Charles C. Grafton, which makes a part of this publication.

RESOLUTIONS OF THE CLERGY.

A MEETING of the Clergy of the Protestant Episcopal Church, in the City of Baltimore, was held on Sunday Afternoon, June 26th, in the Vestry Room of St. Paul's Church. The Bishop of the Diocese having, by request, taken the chair, stated in a brief, but very touching and appropriate address, the object of the meeting, which was to take some action expressive of the feelings and sentiments of the Clergy with reference to the decease of their late, venerable and distinguished brother, the REVEREND WILLIAM EDWARD WYATT, D. D.

On motion, the Rev. James Moore was appointed Secretary to the meeting, and a committee of three, consisting of the Rev. Dr. Allen, and the Rev. Messrs. Schenck and Rankin, was appointed to prepare suitable resolutions. After retiring for a few moments, the committee reported the following, which were, on motion, unanimously adopted.

*Resolved*, That the life-long, persevering, and faithful and effective labor of the deceased in his more than fifty years connection with St. Paul's, his earnest preaching of the gospel in season and out of season"his more than ordinary frequent services in the Sanctuary from an early date of his ministry"his eminent usefulness at the bed of sickness and of death"his deep interest in his parochial schools"in visiting prisons and in reclaiming the guilty from vice and infamy, demand from his brethren in the ministry their lasting and cherished remembrance and thankful acknowledgement to that God by whose grace he was enabled to perform them all.

*Resolved*, that his uniformly dignified, amiable, courteous and Christian deportment have endeared his memory to his friends and we know not that he had ever any enemies.

*Resolved*, in view of the long continued and distinguished position held by our venerated Brother in our Ecclesiastical Councils"that we tender our condolences to the church at large under this its afflictive bereavement, which deprives us of his further co-operation in promoting our Master's work in his church,

*Resolved*, that we tender to his bereaved congregation our unfeigned sympathies and pray that his mantle may rest on his successor in his late charge.

*Resolved*, that we tender to his family our Christian and affectionate condolence"being now bereft of their father's endeared example and his counsels of truth and wisdom, alike leading them to that bright and better life where they may again be with him"with that Saviour to whom in heart and life he was devoted.

*Resolved*, that as a testimony of our high regard to our deceased brother we attend the funeral service in a body, and wear the usual badge of mourning for thirty days"also that we recommend the wearing of the same to our brethren of the ministry in the diocese.

On motion it was further resolved that the secretary cause the foregoing resolutions to be published in the secular and church papers.

JAMES MOORE,
Secretary.

RESOLUTIONS OF THE VESTRY.

*Resolved*, That the departure of our venerable father, the REVEREND DR. WYATT, calls upon us for some expression of our sympathy with his bereaved family and congregation in their deep grief for their and our loss.

We bear witness of our deceased father, who for fifty years exercised the priestly office among us, that he was faithful his high calling. He always sought to bring up the people committed to his charge, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, as well by instructing them in the truths connected with the Church and the Sacraments, as by the cultivation in them, and in himself, of personal piety. He well knew how to combine devotion to his God and Saviour, with reverence and affection to the Church, which is His Body and Spouse.

We remember, with thankful joy, his labors beyond the limits of his strictly parochial duties, in visiting the poor, the sick, and the prisoners, concerning which the King hath said: Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me.

All that he did was done in a loving spirit, which shone forth in that Christian courtesy for which he was so remarkable. But it is more important that it was done in the power of that faith which worketh by love, and in reliance upon the merits of Him Who died for our sins, and rose again for our justification.

We therefore exhort the mourners not to sorrow as those who have no hope, but rather to think of the voice, which was heard from Heaven, saying: Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

F. W. BRUNE, Register.
HUGH DAVEY EVANS, Chairman.

It was also

*Resolved*, That the Rev. Mr. Grafton be requested to furnish the Vestry with a copy of the Discourse which he delivered in the Church on Sunday morning, in order that it and the Resolutions of the Vestry and the Clergy may be published in pamphlet form, as a Memorial of the late Rector.

---

The Steward of God: A Sermon
By the Rev. C. C. Grafton, LL. B.
Preached in St. Paul's Church, Baltimore.

IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY GHOST."AMEN.

"RIGHT DEAR IN THE SIGHT OF THE LORD IS THE DEATH OF HIS SAINTS.""Ps. cxvi. 13 v.

YES, dear in His sight is the death of those for whom He died. Dear, for He has seen them from the beginning. He has loved each one of them with an everlasting love. He knoweth them all by their names. He called each one into existence with a different design. He formed each one to adorn a special place in His Glory. For the accomplishment of this end, He was made Man.

So He began a new creation. Then He offered Himself for them, and moreover gave Himself *to* them, that in Him, they might be remade.

By ordained instrumentalities, efficacious through the abiding presence of the Holy Ghost in the Church, the New Adam, united them to His own sinless and deathless Nature, that so, they might be delivered from the bondage of sin and saved from its penalty. This blessing of the promise, according to the orderings of His Providence whose gifts and callings are without repentance, fell on them in infancy, or afterwards, drawn by prevenient grace, they came, penitent and believing, to receive this gift of eternal life.

Thus in Holy Baptism they were grafted into the Vine, were made members of It, and Its Life flowed in their veins. They were by the potency of the Almighty's creative power, actually born again and their bodies and souls, received from the New Adam the seminal principle of a new nature; a principle, to be preserved and developed, through co-operation with divine grace, in this formative trial-time, and to unfold in all the transporting, conquering beauty of Its Resurrection power, when His children shall awake up after His Likeness and be satisfied with It.

As the connection between ourselves and the first Adam is not one of feeling, or belief, or any mental or moral conviction"but an actual one by way of descent and participation of nature, so is our connection with Him, in whom we are made alive, actual also, and we made members of His Flesh and Bones, are partakers of the Divine Nature"Christ in His Saints is the hope of their Glory.

In this union with Him, in the strength of His continually imparted supplies of grace, under the quickening enabling Power of the Comforter, they struggle on, using diligence, seeing the righteous shall scarcely be saved, to make their calling and election sure, watching, praying, confessing, fasting, using discipline, doing alms, abounding in good works, walking obediently to the Church's order, holding fast the form of sound words whereof the Church is the keeper and witness, waging a daily warfare against the terrible ones, the World, the Flesh, the Devil, whose breathings are as a blast of a furnace, exercising their conscience in the trials and duties of life, that it may be void of offence toward God and man, looking ever to Jesus as the Author and Finisher of their faith, and persevering in their continuance in Him unto the end.

In behalf of His child, the Dear Hands of the Crucified are ever uplifted, the prayers of the Church, remaining and departed, continually ascend. The Loving Providences of God compass him as the hills stand round about Jerusalem, and holy Angels, sent to minister to the heirs of salvation, guard lest at any time he dash his foot against a stone. He moves on amidst the engrossing cares of life, its ever varying forms of trial, its alternations of success and disappointment, its inward and outward temptations, surrounded by the captivating enchantments of earthly pleasure, by the seductive allurements of its honors, enticed by passion, courted by interest, flattered by pride, and oh, blessed is it, if he passes through the fire, and there be no smell or taint upon his garments. Blessed if, stained and scarred in life's warfare, yet, persevering in spite of failure and fall, he be found at last clothed with Christ's Righteousness and that holiness without which no man can see the Lord. Blessed time is it, when the hands are crossed upon the breast and life's work is over and the crown is won. Those unseen ones who by appointment have watched his course and succoured and defended him may calmly rejoice and sing their psalm of thanksgiving. Good occasion of gladness is it to those also, who, with fervent zeal for the souls of men, beneath the horns of the altar, pray for the consummation of Christ's kingdom. The Blessed Saints in rest, rejoice that the Body of Christ has been strengthened and another gathered to their company.

Those also who are folded more closely in Him and in the Beatific Vision behold His wondrous work, rejoice that grace has not been rejected, and that Love has won its victory.

Yea"but dear is it above all, right dear to Him Who loved them from the beginning, when His child, His own ransomed one, is secured forever in the embrace of His Love.

God hath taken, dear brethren, our head away from us to-day. After long years of toil He hath called His servant home. The good priest's work has ended. For more than fifty years he has been to you the Ambassador of Christ and Steward of the Mysteries. How faithfully he dispensed them and ministered the word of reconciliation you well know. Now the chalice has been taken away, and he will no longer offer for you the sacrifice of the altar and show forth Christ's death until his coming again, nor stretch forth Christ's Hand to heal and in baptism save us by the washing of regeneration, or, to the penitent minister the reconciling word, in virtue of this priestly power, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them." His hands will not again break for us the Bread of Life or his voice be heard in admonition or blessing. But we must remember he is still one with us. He has gone before but is not separated from us. He is still a member of that indissoluble Body, the One Holy Catholic Church. Its members are not united, as members of a society or aggregation of individuals, associated together by the loose outward ligament of a common profession, but, being in reality members of the Man Christ Jesus, having a new common parentage and descent from Him, as branches of a common vine, as children of one family, are they members one of another. It is an organic union, subtle as life, lasting as eternity. All, in whatever state are partakers of the Virtue that forever goes out from Him, and pulsates through every being connected with Himself, upholding them in existence and grace, and dispensing to them Life, Goodness, Joy. The earthly ministration of our father is over. But we believe in the Communion of Saints. He is still one with us. Our hopes are still one. His prayers are yet ours.

Of him, I cannot speak worthily as I would. Other and abler ones must on some commemorative occasion do that for you"I can only bring myself to-day to say how much I sympathise with you his people and how much I loved him myself. "I cannot hope," as he himself said on a similar occasion, "to discuss coherently or advantageously any topic however interesting or important it might be. Jesus who wept at the grave of Lazarus will forgive the infirmity that makes the pulpit this day scarcely the organ of instruction or consolation."

His priestly work is over. This work is one both dangerous and difficult. So dangerous is it that many of the holy fathers feared lest a larger proportion of the priesthood than of any other vocation would be lost. So difficult that few, if they foresaw their trials, but would, unless restrained by grace, flee from it. This is not indeed the usual estimate of our time. The sacred character of the priest's office is, in our day, almost unknown. In those religious bodies, where there is no priesthood, it cannot be otherwise. But even within the Church the priest is too often regarded merely as a preacher. The earnest and spiritually-minded, whose eyes the Holy Ghost has opened to the wondrous things of the divine law, realize the Catholic truth, that the priesthood is not a mere profession, but a Power delegated from Him Whom the priest represents, a power of life, to be applied to the saving of souls for whom the Master died, a Power to be accounted for to Him, Who bade His servants watch for souls, as they that must give account. In this He left them the pattern of His own Perfect example. "Of those Whom Thou hast given Me have I lost none." Holy Doctors and Fathers and Confessors have there been who have trained many souls in Holiness, but few indeed can say with the Blessed Apostle St. Paul, I am free from the blood of all men. A great and weighty responsibility rests on the priest. Very deeply indeed did our father feel it. "When I heard him preach on the duties of the office," said a former Bishop of this Diocese, "I wanted to retire that I might weep."

As we gather about the resting place of his earthly remains and recall his work, we remember how exceedingly useful he was to the church, how long he presided in her assemblies, how nobly he contended for the truth, how wisely he counselled. We remember how many he brought into the ministry and trained them for it. We look about and see the evidences of his usefulness in the parish schools which he founded or cherished"the home for poor and destitute boys which he commenced, the asylum for girls which so increased during his administration. We recall the long years of weekly toil at the penitentiary, continued to the very last and where only lately he presented some twenty candidates for confirmation. The illness which broke down his weakened frame was contracted by his visits to the hospitals. Old men tell of him, how during the times of pestilence he remained at his post and was twice struck down by disease. But those who knew best have passed away. Only a short time before his death we find him baptising an infant whose grand-parent he had held in his arms and signed with the cross of our redemption. The long years have grown over his good deeds and they have become hidden. But a man's life cannot be summed up statistically. His actions cannot be invoiced and weighed. It is not so much what any man has done, as what he has tried to do. We judge men best by the earnestness of their endeavors. The constraining principle of our father's life, was a desire for souls.

He was a devoted catholic priest.

He learnt his theology before the effects of the dark day and low moral tone of the Past century had passed away and to him must be awarded this highest meed of praise, that he was far in advance of his day. He sympathised with those men of holy and blessed memory Laud, Andrews, Ken, Herbert, Wilson, whose saintly lives and teaching have been the strength of the Anglican communion. Those who most widely differed from him, knew his piety, and looked up to him.

Holding, the subjective side of the truth, our nature's incapacity to succor and redeem itself, the need of Divine aid for its restoration, the necessity for a radical change of heart and life wrought through the operation of the Holy Ghost, the powerlessness of man to turn to God, save in the strength of that grace that fore-cometh us in every good wish and deed, the submission of the whole man, in faith and penitence, as the necessary condition for the beneficent reception of Christ's gifts, the inability of man by his works to atone for the past, and by their suffering to merit heaven as his earned reward, the entire dependance from first to last, on Christ, His Precious Blood, His Priceless Gifts, His Abounding Merits,"yet, was he not blinded to the other, the objective side of the faith. He held both. He bore witness to the whole truth as it is, in Christ Jesus. Hence he taught, that the Church was Christ's appointed witness of the truth and its keeper, in opposition to that modern tradition of men, that each should search the bible and select a faith for himself. He showed men Christ's great love to them in establishing a power clothed with authority to speak in His Name, protected by His Presence, illuminated with the Holy Ghost, so that His disciples might not be led away by cunning craftiness, or new revelations, or divers kinds of doctrine. He plainly taught that to separate from the Church, was not only to deprive oneself of great blessings, but also to commit the Sin of Schism.

His doctrine was no less sound concerning the ministry and the necessity of the apostolical succession. He held that God no longer sent men, like the prophets of old, authenticated by miraculous signs, but had now made a revelation of Himself, in Christ, who was the Great High Priest and Prophet and that a Christian ministry must derive its authority directly from and trace it to the Man Christ Jesus. They alone could represent this Person and act for Him, dispensing His gifts, teaching with His authority, as His Ambassadors and Stewards, binding and loosing in His Name, whom He had actually made His Agents and commissioned so to act. Our father in Christ taught us to hold forth the Catholic truth, that without this power, coming to each priest, through the laying on of apostolic hands there could be no priesthood, and without a priest to consecrate, no sacrament.

A faithful son of the church"he believed and taught that in baptism we are made members of Christ, Children of God, inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, and over every little one could devoutly give thanks to God, for its regeneration. He held the sacrament to be the channel of the grace of our new birth, and that unresisting infancy and childlike maturity alike received the gift.

The Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, he taught us, was not a mere commemorative act, done in remembrance of an absent Lord, but a communion of Christ's Body and Blood, really present and actually received by the faithful.

And these blessed and heavenly truths were not found merely in his sermons. In these days of much seeming churchmanship, this true priest, set a noble example. At much sacrifice, and during times of great opposition and excitement, he carried into practice what he proclaimed. His Church was daily open and the service according to the intention of the prayer book daily said.

It was his design, that the Church should always be open and the people trained to resort thither for private prayer and meditation. Of the very few churches in this land his was one, where the Blessed Eucharist was weekly offered and the Bread of Life broken. Our good priest and father desired to build his people up in Christ, and we cannot but feel that a Doctor and light of the church has departed,"one who in his day manfully bore the banner of church principle and did much for catholic truth in the diocese.

It does not become me to speak of his high intellectual gifts and attainments, or to offer any analysis of his character. He possessed great sobriety of judgment, very great knowledge of mankind, was very wise in counsel, was very quiet in all his ways and very fixed in his principles. He was called to endure many trials, and always delicate, he was through life afflicted with much bodily suffering. This mark of the Lord Jesus was especially upon him and there was spiritually fitting in the unusually painful and protracted illness which terminated his earthly career.

Men ask why should such a servant of God be called to such unwonted and protracted sufferings. Doubtless, brethren in part for our sakes.

It is convenient for you, said the Apostle, that I remain. Our father's work ceased not because pain had contorted his frame and racked him with its agony. His mission lingered though his work seemed done. When he could no longer from his accustomed place"and who of his people can ever forget the mingled dignity and kindness of manner, the saintly appearance, the earnestness of his convictions,"speak to you, when the voice, which had for so many years declared Christ's message of Pardoning and Redeeming Love and for your soul's sake had plead with you, was silent through suffering and the stately grace of speech was exchanged for the moans of pain, there came from out the chamber where the sufferer lay an utterance, tremulous with pain, but eloquent with grace, witnessing to you all, of the sustaining comforting power of that catholic faith in which he lived and died. Nor was it for our sakes alone he suffered. God's chastisements are acts of love. "Could we but see this as God sees it, he said, how should we not rejoice?" Because dear brethren he had the reasoning faith, did God grant him so great an earthly purification. It is in love Christ binds the martyr's crown about his servants. In love grants to the few who can so follow Him, to fill up a larger portion of the sufferings which remain. In love gave the Apostle to bear in his body the mark of the Lord Jesus. In love he drew his servant near Him, and made him share His earthly pain"Gave him to drink out of His Own cup"Pressed His Own Signet and mark upon him, Placing the representation of our Dear Lord in His Passion and Crucifixion where his eye, in his almost constant agony, might rest upon it, he drew from the constant contemplation of that death-bed solace and support for his own. With such grace did he endure the increasing agonies that so distorted the human frame and bound him almost to one position for some seventeen months of suffering days and nights, with such cheerfulness and rejoicing, that the weekly celebration of the Blessed Sacrament and the Viaticum for his journey seemed to those about like the joy of some high festival.

Everywhere the shadows of death are falling. Men are passing whom the world will place high in her calendar, whose names will glitter in her history, who have ventured for and won earth's wreath of fame, in whose honor fair and costly monuments will be erected, whom the artists, the orators, the poet's skill will be taxed to praise, who, perchance with civic pomp and state, will be borne to their burial. But the saints are hidden. They are known of God. The Angels who come and go care naught for earth's estimate. No proclamation may herald his title, save the tears of those who loved him. But the bright glad Angels, who watch round death beds such as his, and bear the dear burden to the Father's House, go on their upward way rejoicing.

Dear to them, and right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of His Saints. Just when we read together these words of the psalter for the day, the Angel of the Lord touched him and he was called away. Let us remember the good priest's admonitions and prepare to follow him. Let us remember he is still one with us and supplicates for us. Let us with the holy men of old remember him before our common Father and God and lovingly pray, "that the souls of the faithful departed and especially this our father in Christ may rest in peace." Let us, in the language of the earlier uncorrupted liturgies, pray the Lord "for those who have fallen and rested in the faith of Christ, to grant rest unto their souls in the bosom of our holy fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and bring them into a green place beside the waters of refreshing in the paradise of bliss." And humbly pray we also for ourselves that our death may be like the Righteous and our last end like his"that it may be said, even unto us, well done, good and faithful servant enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."

REQUIESCAT IN PACE.
