---
title: A Preparation for Holy Communion
description: A Preparation for Holy Communion. From Project Canterbury.
---

> > > A Preparation for Holy Communion
> >
> > O LORD,
> > I am not worthy, I am not fit,
> > that Thou shouldst come under the roof
> > of my soul;
> > for it is all desolate and ruined;
> > nor hast Thou in me fitting place
> > to lay Thy head.
> > But, as Thou didst vouchsafe
> > to lie in the cavern and manger of brute cattle,
> > as Thou didst not disdain
> > to be entertained in the house of Simon the leper,
> > as Thou didst not disdain
> > that harlot, like me, who was a sinner,
> > coming to Thee and touching Thee;
> > as Thou abhorredst not
> > her polluted and loathsome mouth;
> > nor the thief upon the cross
> > confessing Thee:
> > So me too the ruined, wretched,
> > and excessive sinner;
> > deign to receive to the touch and partaking
> > of the immaculate, supernatural, lifegiving,
> > and saving mysteries
> > of Thy all-holy Body
> > and Thy precious Blood.
> > Listen, O LORD, our GOD,
> > from Thy holy habitation,
> > and from the glorious throne of Thy kingdom,
> > and come to sanctify us.
> > O Thou who sittest on high with the FATHER,
> > and art present with us here invisible;
> > come Thou to sanctify the gifts which lie before Thee,
> > and those in whose behalf, and by whom,
> > and the things for which,
> > they are brought near Thee.
> > And grant to us communion,
> > unto faith without shame,
> > love without dissimulation;
> > fulfilment of Thy commandments,
> > alacrity for every spiritual fruit;
> > hindrance of all adversity,
> > healing of soul and body;
> > that we too, with all Saints,
> > who have been well-pleasing to Thee from the beginning,
> > may become partakers
> > of Thy incorrupt and everlasting goods,
> > which Thou hast prepared, O LORD, for them that love Thee;
> > in whom Thou art glorified
> > for ever and ever.
> > Lamb of GOD,
> > that takest away the sin of the world,
> > take away the sin of me,
> > the utter sinner.
> >
> > > \[Unto a pledge of communion. *Acts* ii. 42.
> > > A memorial of the Dispensation. *Eph*. iii. 2.
> > > A showing forth of His death. 1 *Cor*. xi. 26.
> > > A communion of Body and Blood. *Luke* xxii. 19.
> > > A sharing in the Spirit. 1 *Cor*. xii. 13.
> > > Remission of sins. *Matt*. xxvi. 28.
> > > A riddance of things contrary. 1 *Cor*. v. 7.
> > > Rest of conscience. *Matt*. xi. 29.
> > > Blotting out of debts. *Col*. ii. 14.
> > > Cleansing of stains. *Heb*. ix. 14.
> > > Healing of the soul's sickness. 1 *Peter* ii. 24.
> > > Renewing of the covenant. *Psalm* ii. 5.
> > > Food of spiritual life. *John* vi. 27.
> > > Increase of strengthening grace. *Heb*. xiii. 9.
> > > And of winning consolation. *Luke* ii. 25.
> > > Compunction of penitence. 2 Cor. vii. 9.
> > > Illumination of mind. *Luke* xxiv. 31.
> > > Exercise of humility. 1 *Peter* v. 5.
> > > Seal of faith. 2 *Cor*. i. 22.
> > > Fulness of wisdom. *Rom*. xi. 33.
> > > Bond of love. *John* xiii. 35.
> > > Call for a collection. 1 *Cor*. xvi. i.
> > > A means of endurance. 1 *Peter* iv. 1.
> > > Liveliness of thanksgiving. *Psalm* cxvi. 12.
> > > Confidence of prayer. *Ibid*. 13.
> > > Mutual indwelling. *John* vi. 56.
> > > Pledge of the resurrection. *Ibid*. 34.
> > > Acceptable defense in judgment. *Luke* xiv. 18
> > > Covenant of the inheritance. *Luke* xxii. 20.
> > > Figure of perfection. *John* xvii. 23.\]
> >
> > We then remembering too, O sovereign LORD,
> > in the presence of Thy holy mysteries,
> > the salutary passion of Thy CHRIST,
> > His lifegiving cross,
> > most precious death,
> > three days sepulture,
> > resurrection from the dead,
> > ascent into heaven,
> > session at the right hand of Thee, O LORD,
> > that we, receiving in the pure testimony
> > of our conscience,
> > our portion of Thy sacred things,
> > may be made one with the holy Body and Blood
> > of Thy CHRIST;
> > and receiving them not unworthily,
> > we may hold CHRIST indwelling in our hearts,
> > and may become a temple
> > of Thy HOLY SPIRIT
> > Yea, O our GOD,
> > nor make any of us guilty
> > of Thy dreadful and heavenly mysteries,
> > nor infirm in soul or body
> > from partaking of them unworthily.
> > But grant us
> > until our last and closing breath,
> > worthily to receive a hope of Thy holy things,
> > for sanctification, enlightening, strengthening,
> > a relief of the weight of my many sins,
> > a preservative against all satanic working,
> > a riddance and hindrance of my evil conscience,
> > a mortification of my passions,
> > an appropriation of Thy commandments,
> > an increase of Thy divine grace;
> > and a securing of Thy kingdom.
> >
> > ---
> >
> > It is finished and done,
> > so far as in our power,
> > CHRIST our GOD,
> > the mystery of Thy dispensation.
> > For we have held remembrance of Thy death,
> > we have seen the figure of Thy resurrection,
> > we have been filled with Thy endless life,
> > we have enjoyed Thy uncloying dainties,
> > which graciously vouchsafe all of us
> > in the world to come.
> > LORD, the good GOD,
> > pardon every soul,
> > that purifieth his heart to seek GOD,
> > the LORD GOD of His fathers,
> > though he be not cleansed
> > according to the purification of the sanctuary.
